[Illustration:

                             GEORGE ALLEN
                               PUBLISHER

                        156 CHARING CROSS ROAD
                                LONDON

                             RUSKIN HOUSE
                                   ]

                            [Illustration:

               _Reading Jane’s Letters._      _Chap 34._
                                   ]




                                PRIDE.
                                  and
                               PREJUDICE

                                  by
                             Jane Austen,

                           with a Preface by
                           George Saintsbury
                                  and
                           Illustrations by
                             Hugh Thomson

                         [Illustration: 1894]

                       Ruskin       156. Charing
                       House.        Cross Road.

                                London
                             George Allen.




             CHISWICK PRESS:--CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
                  TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.




                            [Illustration:

                          _To J. Comyns Carr
                      in acknowledgment of all I
                       owe to his friendship and
                    advice, these illustrations are
                         gratefully inscribed_

                            _Hugh Thomson_
                                   ]




PREFACE.

[Illustration]


_Walt Whitman has somewhere a fine and just distinction between “loving
by allowance” and “loving with personal love.” This distinction applies
to books as well as to men and women; and in the case of the not very
numerous authors who are the objects of the personal affection, it
brings a curious consequence with it. There is much more difference as
to their best work than in the case of those others who are loved “by
allowance” by convention, and because it is felt to be the right and
proper thing to love them. And in the sect--fairly large and yet
unusually choice--of Austenians or Janites, there would probably be
found partisans of the claim to primacy of almost every one of the
novels. To some the delightful freshness and humour of_ Northanger
Abbey, _its completeness, finish, and_ entrain, _obscure the undoubted
critical facts that its scale is small, and its scheme, after all, that
of burlesque or parody, a kind in which the first rank is reached with
difficulty._ Persuasion, _relatively faint in tone, and not enthralling
in interest, has devotees who exalt above all the others its exquisite
delicacy and keeping. The catastrophe of_ Mansfield Park _is admittedly
theatrical, the hero and heroine are insipid, and the author has almost
wickedly destroyed all romantic interest by expressly admitting that
Edmund only took Fanny because Mary shocked him, and that Fanny might
very likely have taken Crawford if he had been a little more assiduous;
yet the matchless rehearsal-scenes and the characters of Mrs. Norris and
others have secured, I believe, a considerable party for it._ Sense and
Sensibility _has perhaps the fewest out-and-out admirers; but it does
not want them._

_I suppose, however, that the majority of at least competent votes
would, all things considered, be divided between_ Emma _and the present
book; and perhaps the vulgar verdict (if indeed a fondness for Miss
Austen be not of itself a patent of exemption from any possible charge
of vulgarity) would go for_ Emma. _It is the larger, the more varied, the
more popular; the author had by the time of its composition seen rather
more of the world, and had improved her general, though not her most
peculiar and characteristic dialogue; such figures as Miss Bates, as the
Eltons, cannot but unite the suffrages of everybody. On the other hand,
I, for my part, declare for_ Pride and Prejudice _unhesitatingly. It
seems to me the most perfect, the most characteristic, the most
eminently quintessential of its author’s works; and for this contention
in such narrow space as is permitted to me, I propose here to show
cause._

_In the first place, the book (it may be barely necessary to remind the
reader) was in its first shape written very early, somewhere about 1796,
when Miss Austen was barely twenty-one; though it was revised and
finished at Chawton some fifteen years later, and was not published till
1813, only four years before her death. I do not know whether, in this
combination of the fresh and vigorous projection of youth, and the
critical revision of middle life, there may be traced the distinct
superiority in point of construction, which, as it seems to me, it
possesses over all the others. The plot, though not elaborate, is almost
regular enough for Fielding; hardly a character, hardly an incident
could be retrenched without loss to the story. The elopement of Lydia
and Wickham is not, like that of Crawford and Mrs. Rushworth, a_ coup de
théâtre; _it connects itself in the strictest way with the course of the
story earlier, and brings about the denouement with complete propriety.
All the minor passages--the loves of Jane and Bingley, the advent of Mr.
Collins, the visit to Hunsford, the Derbyshire tour--fit in after the
same unostentatious, but masterly fashion. There is no attempt at the
hide-and-seek, in-and-out business, which in the transactions between
Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax contributes no doubt a good deal to the
intrigue of_ Emma, _but contributes it in a fashion which I do not think
the best feature of that otherwise admirable book. Although Miss Austen
always liked something of the misunderstanding kind, which afforded her
opportunities for the display of the peculiar and incomparable talent to
be noticed presently, she has been satisfied here with the perfectly
natural occasions provided by the false account of Darcy’s conduct given
by Wickham, and by the awkwardness (arising with equal naturalness) from
the gradual transformation of Elizabeth’s own feelings from positive
aversion to actual love. I do not know whether the all-grasping hand of
the playwright has ever been laid upon_ Pride and Prejudice; _and I dare
say that, if it were, the situations would prove not startling or
garish enough for the footlights, the character-scheme too subtle and
delicate for pit and gallery. But if the attempt were made, it would
certainly not be hampered by any of those loosenesses of construction,
which, sometimes disguised by the conveniences of which the novelist can
avail himself, appear at once on the stage._

_I think, however, though the thought will doubtless seem heretical to
more than one school of critics, that construction is not the highest
merit, the choicest gift, of the novelist. It sets off his other gifts
and graces most advantageously to the critical eye; and the want of it
will sometimes mar those graces--appreciably, though not quite
consciously--to eyes by no means ultra-critical. But a very badly-built
novel which excelled in pathetic or humorous character, or which
displayed consummate command of dialogue--perhaps the rarest of all
faculties--would be an infinitely better thing than a faultless plot
acted and told by puppets with pebbles in their mouths. And despite the
ability which Miss Austen has shown in working out the story, I for one
should put_ Pride and Prejudice _far lower if it did not contain what
seem to me the very masterpieces of Miss Austen’s humour and of her
faculty of character-creation--masterpieces who may indeed admit John
Thorpe, the Eltons, Mrs. Norris, and one or two others to their company,
but who, in one instance certainly, and perhaps in others, are still
superior to them._

_The characteristics of Miss Austen’s humour are so subtle and delicate
that they are, perhaps, at all times easier to apprehend than to
express, and at any particular time likely to be differently
apprehended by different persons. To me this humour seems to possess a
greater affinity, on the whole, to that of Addison than to any other of
the numerous species of this great British genus. The differences of
scheme, of time, of subject, of literary convention, are, of course,
obvious enough; the difference of sex does not, perhaps, count for much,
for there was a distinctly feminine element in “Mr. Spectator,” and in
Jane Austen’s genius there was, though nothing mannish, much that was
masculine. But the likeness of quality consists in a great number of
common subdivisions of quality--demureness, extreme minuteness of touch,
avoidance of loud tones and glaring effects. Also there is in both a
certain not inhuman or unamiable cruelty. It is the custom with those
who judge grossly to contrast the good nature of Addison with the
savagery of Swift, the mildness of Miss Austen with the boisterousness
of Fielding and Smollett, even with the ferocious practical jokes that
her immediate predecessor, Miss Burney, allowed without very much
protest. Yet, both in Mr. Addison and in Miss Austen there is, though a
restrained and well-mannered, an insatiable and ruthless delight in
roasting and cutting up a fool. A man in the early eighteenth century,
of course, could push this taste further than a lady in the early
nineteenth; and no doubt Miss Austen’s principles, as well as her heart,
would have shrunk from such things as the letter from the unfortunate
husband in the_ Spectator, _who describes, with all the gusto and all the
innocence in the world, how his wife and his friend induce him to play
at blind-man’s-buff. But another_ Spectator _letter--that of the damsel
of fourteen who wishes to marry Mr. Shapely, and assures her selected
Mentor that “he admires your_ Spectators _mightily”--might have been
written by a rather more ladylike and intelligent Lydia Bennet in the
days of Lydia’s great-grandmother; while, on the other hand, some (I
think unreasonably) have found “cynicism” in touches of Miss Austen’s
own, such as her satire of Mrs. Musgrove’s self-deceiving regrets over
her son. But this word “cynical” is one of the most misused in the
English language, especially when, by a glaring and gratuitous
falsification of its original sense, it is applied, not to rough and
snarling invective, but to gentle and oblique satire. If cynicism means
the perception of “the other side,” the sense of “the accepted hells
beneath,” the consciousness that motives are nearly always mixed, and
that to seem is not identical with to be--if this be cynicism, then
every man and woman who is not a fool, who does not care to live in a
fool’s paradise, who has knowledge of nature and the world and life, is
a cynic. And in that sense Miss Austen certainly was one. She may even
have been one in the further sense that, like her own Mr. Bennet, she
took an epicurean delight in dissecting, in displaying, in setting at
work her fools and her mean persons. I think she did take this delight,
and I do not think at all the worse of her for it as a woman, while she
was immensely the better for it as an artist._

_In respect of her art generally, Mr. Goldwin Smith has truly observed
that “metaphor has been exhausted in depicting the perfection of it,
combined with the narrowness of her field;” and he has justly added that
we need not go beyond her own comparison to the art of a miniature
painter. To make this latter observation quite exact we must not use the
term miniature in its restricted sense, and must think rather of Memling
at one end of the history of painting and Meissonier at the other, than
of Cosway or any of his kind. And I am not so certain that I should
myself use the word “narrow” in connection with her. If her world is a
microcosm, the cosmic quality of it is at least as eminent as the
littleness. She does not touch what she did not feel herself called to
paint; I am not so sure that she could not have painted what she did not
feel herself called to touch. It is at least remarkable that in two very
short periods of writing--one of about three years, and another of not
much more than five--she executed six capital works, and has not left a
single failure. It is possible that the romantic paste in her
composition was defective: we must always remember that hardly
anybody born in her decade--that of the eighteenth-century
seventies--independently exhibited the full romantic quality. Even Scott
required hill and mountain and ballad, even Coleridge metaphysics and
German to enable them to chip the classical shell. Miss Austen was an
English girl, brought up in a country retirement, at the time when
ladies went back into the house if there was a white frost which might
pierce their kid shoes, when a sudden cold was the subject of the
gravest fears, when their studies, their ways, their conduct were
subject to all those fantastic limits and restrictions against which
Mary Wollstonecraft protested with better general sense than particular
taste or judgment. Miss Austen, too, drew back when the white frost
touched her shoes; but I think she would have made a pretty good journey
even in a black one._

_For if her knowledge was not very extended, she knew two things which
only genius knows. The one was humanity, and the other was art. On the
first head she could not make a mistake; her men, though limited, are
true, and her women are, in the old sense, “absolute.” As to art, if she
has never tried idealism, her realism is real to a degree which makes
the false realism of our own day look merely dead-alive. Take almost any
Frenchman, except the late M. de Maupassant, and watch him laboriously
piling up strokes in the hope of giving a complete impression. You get
none; you are lucky if, discarding two-thirds of what he gives, you can
shape a real impression out of the rest. But with Miss Austen the
myriad, trivial, unforced strokes build up the picture like magic.
Nothing is false; nothing is superfluous. When (to take the present book
only) Mr. Collins changed his mind from Jane to Elizabeth “while Mrs.
Bennet was stirring the fire” (and we know_ how _Mrs. Bennet would have
stirred the fire), when Mr. Darcy “brought his coffee-cup back_
himself,” _the touch in each case is like that of Swift--“taller by the
breadth of my nail”--which impressed the half-reluctant Thackeray with
just and outspoken admiration. Indeed, fantastic as it may seem, I
should put Miss Austen as near to Swift in some ways, as I have put her
to Addison in others._

_This Swiftian quality appears in the present novel as it appears
nowhere else in the character of the immortal, the ineffable Mr.
Collins. Mr. Collins is really_ great; _far greater than anything Addison
ever did, almost great enough for Fielding or for Swift himself. It has
been said that no one ever was like him. But in the first place,_ he
_was like him; he is there--alive, imperishable, more real than hundreds
of prime ministers and archbishops, of “metals, semi-metals, and
distinguished philosophers.” In the second place, it is rash, I think,
to conclude that an actual Mr. Collins was impossible or non-existent at
the end of the eighteenth century. It is very interesting that we
possess, in this same gallery, what may be called a spoiled first
draught, or an unsuccessful study of him, in John Dashwood. The
formality, the under-breeding, the meanness, are there; but the portrait
is only half alive, and is felt to be even a little unnatural. Mr.
Collins is perfectly natural, and perfectly alive. In fact, for all the
“miniature,” there is something gigantic in the way in which a certain
side, and more than one, of humanity, and especially eighteenth-century
humanity, its Philistinism, its well-meaning but hide-bound morality,
its formal pettiness, its grovelling respect for rank, its materialism,
its selfishness, receives exhibition. I will not admit that one speech
or one action of this inestimable man is incapable of being reconciled
with reality, and I should not wonder if many of these words and actions
are historically true._

_But the greatness of Mr. Collins could not have been so satisfactorily
exhibited if his creatress had not adjusted so artfully to him the
figures of Mr. Bennet and of Lady Catherine de Bourgh. The latter, like
Mr. Collins himself, has been charged with exaggeration. There is,
perhaps, a very faint shade of colour for the charge; but it seems to me
very faint indeed. Even now I do not think that it would be impossible
to find persons, especially female persons, not necessarily of noble
birth, as overbearing, as self-centred, as neglectful of good manners,
as Lady Catherine. A hundred years ago, an earl’s daughter, the Lady
Powerful (if not exactly Bountiful) of an out-of-the-way country parish,
rich, long out of marital authority, and so forth, had opportunities of
developing these agreeable characteristics which seldom present
themselves now. As for Mr. Bennet, Miss Austen, and Mr. Darcy, and even
Miss Elizabeth herself, were, I am inclined to think, rather hard on him
for the “impropriety” of his conduct. His wife was evidently, and must
always have been, a quite irreclaimable fool; and unless he had shot her
or himself there was no way out of it for a man of sense and spirit but
the ironic. From no other point of view is he open to any reproach,
except for an excusable and not unnatural helplessness at the crisis of
the elopement, and his utterances are the most acutely delightful in the
consciously humorous kind--in the kind that we laugh with, not at--that
even Miss Austen has put into the mouth of any of her characters. It is
difficult to know whether he is most agreeable when talking to his wife,
or when putting Mr. Collins through his paces; but the general sense of
the world has probably been right in preferring to the first rank his
consolation to the former when she maunders over the entail, “My dear,
do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for better things.
Let us flatter ourselves that_ I _may be the survivor;” and his inquiry
to his colossal cousin as to the compliments which Mr. Collins has just
related as made by himself to Lady Catherine, “May I ask whether these
pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the
result of previous study?” These are the things which give Miss Austen’s
readers the pleasant shocks, the delightful thrills, which are felt by
the readers of Swift, of Fielding, and we may here add, of Thackeray, as
they are felt by the readers of no other English author of fiction
outside of these four._

_The goodness of the minor characters in_ Pride and Prejudice _has been
already alluded to, and it makes a detailed dwelling on their beauties
difficult in any space, and impossible in this. Mrs. Bennet we have
glanced at, and it is not easy to say whether she is more exquisitely
amusing or more horribly true. Much the same may be said of Kitty and
Lydia; but it is not every author, even of genius, who would have
differentiated with such unerring skill the effects of folly and
vulgarity of intellect and disposition working upon the common
weaknesses of woman at such different ages. With Mary, Miss Austen has
taken rather less pains, though she has been even more unkind to her;
not merely in the text, but, as we learn from those interesting
traditional appendices which Mr. Austen Leigh has given us, in dooming
her privately to marry “one of Mr. Philips’s clerks.” The habits of
first copying and then retailing moral sentiments, of playing and
singing too long in public, are, no doubt, grievous and criminal; but
perhaps poor Mary was rather the scapegoat of the sins of blue stockings
in that Fordyce-belectured generation. It is at any rate difficult not
to extend to her a share of the respect and affection (affection and
respect of a peculiar kind; doubtless), with which one regards Mr.
Collins, when she draws the moral of Lydia’s fall. I sometimes wish
that the exigencies of the story had permitted Miss Austen to unite
these personages, and thus at once achieve a notable mating and soothe
poor Mrs. Bennet’s anguish over the entail._

_The Bingleys and the Gardiners and the Lucases, Miss Darcy and Miss de
Bourgh, Jane, Wickham, and the rest, must pass without special comment,
further than the remark that Charlotte Lucas (her egregious papa, though
delightful, is just a little on the thither side of the line between
comedy and farce) is a wonderfully clever study in drab of one kind, and
that Wickham (though something of Miss Austen’s hesitation of touch in
dealing with young men appears) is a not much less notable sketch in
drab of another. Only genius could have made Charlotte what she is, yet
not disagreeable; Wickham what he is, without investing him either with
a cheap Don Juanish attractiveness or a disgusting rascality. But the
hero and the heroine are not tints to be dismissed._

_Darcy has always seemed to me by far the best and most interesting of
Miss Austen’s heroes; the only possible competitor being Henry Tilney,
whose part is so slight and simple that it hardly enters into
comparison. It has sometimes, I believe, been urged that his pride is
unnatural at first in its expression and later in its yielding, while
his falling in love at all is not extremely probable. Here again I
cannot go with the objectors. Darcy’s own account of the way in which
his pride had been pampered, is perfectly rational and sufficient; and
nothing could be, psychologically speaking, a_ causa verior _for its
sudden restoration to healthy conditions than the shock of Elizabeth’s
scornful refusal acting on a nature_ ex hypothesi _generous. Nothing in
even our author is finer and more delicately touched than the change of
his demeanour at the sudden meeting in the grounds of Pemberley. Had he
been a bad prig or a bad coxcomb, he might have been still smarting
under his rejection, or suspicious that the girl had come
husband-hunting. His being neither is exactly consistent with the
probable feelings of a man spoilt in the common sense, but not really
injured in disposition, and thoroughly in love. As for his being in
love, Elizabeth has given as just an exposition of the causes of that
phenomenon as Darcy has of the conditions of his unregenerate state,
only she has of course not counted in what was due to her own personal
charm._

_The secret of that charm many men and not a few women, from Miss Austen
herself downwards, have felt, and like most charms it is a thing rather
to be felt than to be explained. Elizabeth of course belongs to the_
allegro _or_ allegra _division of the army of Venus. Miss Austen was
always provokingly chary of description in regard to her beauties; and
except the fine eyes, and a hint or two that she had at any rate
sometimes a bright complexion, and was not very tall, we hear nothing
about her looks. But her chief difference from other heroines of the
lively type seems to lie first in her being distinctly clever--almost
strong-minded, in the better sense of that objectionable word--and
secondly in her being entirely destitute of ill-nature for all her
propensity to tease and the sharpness of her tongue. Elizabeth can give
at least as good as she gets when she is attacked; but she never
“scratches,” and she never attacks first. Some of the merest
obsoletenesses of phrase and manner give one or two of her early
speeches a slight pertness, but that is nothing, and when she comes to
serious business, as in the great proposal scene with Darcy (which is,
as it should be, the climax of the interest of the book), and in the
final ladies’ battle with Lady Catherine, she is unexceptionable. Then
too she is a perfectly natural girl. She does not disguise from herself
or anybody that she resents Darcy’s first ill-mannered personality with
as personal a feeling. (By the way, the reproach that the ill-manners of
this speech are overdone is certainly unjust; for things of the same
kind, expressed no doubt less stiltedly but more coarsely, might have
been heard in more than one ball-room during this very year from persons
who ought to have been no worse bred than Darcy.) And she lets the
injury done to Jane and the contempt shown to the rest of her family
aggravate this resentment in the healthiest way in the world._

_Still, all this does not explain her charm, which, taking beauty as a
common form of all heroines, may perhaps consist in the addition to her
playfulness, her wit, her affectionate and natural disposition, of a
certain fearlessness very uncommon in heroines of her type and age.
Nearly all of them would have been in speechless awe of the magnificent
Darcy; nearly all of them would have palpitated and fluttered at the
idea of proposals, even naughty ones, from the fascinating Wickham.
Elizabeth, with nothing offensive, nothing_ viraginous, _nothing of the
“New Woman” about her, has by nature what the best modern (not “new”)
women have by education and experience, a perfect freedom from the idea
that all men may bully her if they choose, and that most will away with
her if they can. Though not in the least “impudent and mannish grown,”
she has no mere sensibility, no nasty niceness about her. The form of
passion common and likely to seem natural in Miss Austen’s day was so
invariably connected with the display of one or the other, or both of
these qualities, that she has not made Elizabeth outwardly passionate.
But I, at least, have not the slightest doubt that she would have
married Darcy just as willingly without Pemberley as with it, and
anybody who can read between lines will not find the lovers’
conversations in the final chapters so frigid as they might have looked
to the Della Cruscans of their own day, and perhaps do look to the Della
Cruscans of this._

_And, after all, what is the good of seeking for the reason of
charm?--it is there. There were better sense in the sad mechanic
exercise of determining the reason of its absence where it is not. In
the novels of the last hundred years there are vast numbers of young
ladies with whom it might be a pleasure to fall in love; there are at
least five with whom, as it seems to me, no man of taste and spirit can
help doing so. Their names are, in chronological order, Elizabeth
Bennet, Diana Vernon, Argemone Lavington, Beatrix Esmond, and Barbara
Grant. I should have been most in love with Beatrix and Argemone; I
should, I think, for mere occasional companionship, have preferred Diana
and Barbara. But to live with and to marry, I do not know that any one
of the four can come into competition with Elizabeth._

_GEORGE SAINTSBURY._




[Illustration: List of Illustrations.]


                                                                    PAGE

Frontispiece                                                          iv

Title-page                                                             v

Dedication                                                           vii

Heading to Preface                                                    ix

Heading to List of Illustrations                                     xxv

Heading to Chapter I.                                                  1

“He came down to see the place”                                        2

Mr. and Mrs. Bennet                                                    5

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it”                                      6

“I’m the tallest”                                                      9

“He rode a black horse”                                               10

“When the party entered”                                              12

“She is tolerable”                                                    15

Heading to Chapter IV.                                                18

Heading to Chapter V.                                                 22

“Without once opening his lips”                                       24

Tailpiece to Chapter V.                                               26

Heading to Chapter VI.                                                27

“The entreaties of several”                                           31

“A note for Miss Bennet”                                              36

“Cheerful prognostics”                                                40

“The apothecary came”                                                 43

“Covering a screen”                                                   45

“Mrs. Bennet and her two youngest girls”                              53

Heading to Chapter X.                                                 60

“No, no; stay where you are”                                          67

“Piling up the fire”                                                  69

Heading to Chapter XII.                                               75

Heading to Chapter XIII.                                              78

Heading to Chapter XIV.                                               84

“Protested that he never read novels”                                 87

Heading to Chapter XV.                                                89

Heading to Chapter XVI.                                               95

“The officers of the ----shire”                                       97

“Delighted to see their dear friend again”                           108

Heading to Chapter XVIII.                                            113

“Such very superior dancing is not often seen”                       118

“To assure you in the most animated language”                        132

Heading to Chapter XX.                                               139

“They entered the breakfast-room”                                    143

Heading to Chapter XXI.                                              146

“Walked back with them”                                              148

Heading to Chapter XXII.                                             154

“So much love and eloquence”                                         156

“Protested he must be entirely mistaken”                             161

“Whenever she spoke in a low voice”                                  166

Heading to Chapter XXIV.                                             168

Heading to Chapter XXV.                                              175

“Offended two or three young ladies”                                 177

“Will you come and see me?”                                          181

“On the stairs”                                                      189

“At the door”                                                        194

“In conversation with the ladies”                                    198

“Lady Catherine,” said she, “you have given me a treasure”           200

Heading to Chapter XXX.                                              209

“He never failed to inform them”                                     211

“The gentlemen accompanied him”                                      213

Heading to Chapter XXXI.                                             215

Heading to Chapter XXXII.                                            221

“Accompanied by their aunt”                                          225

“On looking up”                                                      228

Heading to Chapter XXXIV.                                            235

“Hearing herself called”                                             243

Heading to Chapter XXXVI.                                            253

“Meeting accidentally in town”                                       256

“His parting obeisance”                                              261

“Dawson”                                                             263

“The elevation of his feelings”                                      267

“They had forgotten to leave any message”                            270

“How nicely we are crammed in!”                                      272

Heading to Chapter XL.                                               278

“I am determined never to speak of it again”                         283

“When Colonel Miller’s regiment went away”                           285

“Tenderly flirting”                                                  290

The arrival of the Gardiners                                         294

“Conjecturing as to the date”                                        301

Heading to Chapter XLIV.                                             318

“To make herself agreeable to all”                                   321

“Engaged by the river”                                               327

Heading to Chapter XLVI.                                             334

“I have not an instant to lose”                                      339

“The first pleasing earnest of their welcome”                        345

The Post                                                             359

“To whom I have related the affair”                                  363

Heading to Chapter XLIX.                                             368

“But perhaps you would like to read it”                              370

“The spiteful old ladies”                                            377

“With an affectionate smile”                                         385

“I am sure she did not listen”                                       393

“Mr. Darcy with him”                                                 404

“Jane happened to look round”                                        415

“Mrs. Long and her nieces”                                           420

“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you”                             422

Heading to Chapter LVI.                                              431

“After a short survey”                                               434

“But now it comes out”                                               442

“The efforts of his aunt”                                            448

“Unable to utter a syllable”                                         457

“The obsequious civility”                                            466

Heading to Chapter LXI.                                              472

The End                                                              476




[Illustration: ·PRIDE AND PREJUDICE·




Chapter I.]


It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune must be in want of a wife.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful
property of some one or other of their daughters.

“My dear Mr. Bennet,” said his lady to him one day, “have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?”

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

“But it is,” returned she; “for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she
told me all about it.”

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

“Do not you want to know who has taken it?” cried his wife, impatiently.

“_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.”

[Illustration:

“He came down to see the place”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

This was invitation enough.

“Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
delighted with it that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is
to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be
in the house by the end of next week.”

“What is his name?”

“Bingley.”

“Is he married or single?”

“Oh, single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or
five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!”

“How so? how can it affect them?”

“My dear Mr. Bennet,” replied his wife, “how can you be so tiresome? You
must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.”

“Is that his design in settling here?”

“Design? Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
soon as he comes.”

“I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go--or you may send
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for as you are
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the
party.”

“My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but
I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five
grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.”

“In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.”

“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into
the neighbourhood.”

“It is more than I engage for, I assure you.”

“But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would
be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go,
merely on that account; for in general, you know, they visit no new
comers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to visit
him, if you do not.”

“You are over scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my
hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls--though
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.”

“I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the
others: and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.”

“They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he: “they are
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
quickness than her sisters.”

“Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way? You take
delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor nerves.”

“You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They
are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration
these twenty years at least.”

“Ah, you do not know what I suffer.”

“But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.”

“It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not
visit them.”

“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
all.”

Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind
was less difficult to develope. She was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented, she
fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her
daughters married: its solace was visiting and news.

[Illustration: M^{r.} & M^{rs.} Bennet

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




[Illustration:

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER II.


[Illustration]

Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He
had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his
wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following
manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he
suddenly addressed her with,--

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.”

“We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes,” said her mother,
resentfully, “since we are not to visit.”

“But you forget, mamma,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long has promised to introduce him.”

“I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces
of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
of her.”

“No more have I,” said Mr. Bennet; “and I am glad to find that you do
not depend on her serving you.”

Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply; but, unable to contain
herself, began scolding one of her daughters.

“Don’t keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven’s sake! Have a little
compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”

“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times
them ill.”

“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty, fretfully. “When
is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”

“To-morrow fortnight.”

“Ay, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Mrs. Long does not come back till
the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for
she will not know him herself.”

“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
Mr. Bingley to _her_.”

“Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him
myself; how can you be so teasing?”

“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly
very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture, somebody else will; and after
all, Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and, therefore,
as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I
will take it on myself.”

The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, “Nonsense,
nonsense!”

“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried he. “Do
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,
Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read
great books, and make extracts.”

Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.

“While Mary is adjusting her ideas,” he continued, “let us return to Mr.
Bingley.”

“I am sick of Mr. Bingley,” cried his wife.

“I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did you not tell me so before? If I
had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on
him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now.”

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished--that of Mrs.
Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy
was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the
while.

“How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should
persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to
neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! And it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a
word about it till now.”

“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,” said Mr. Bennet; and,
as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.

“What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was
shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;
or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but
for your sakes we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
ball.”

“Oh,” said Lydia, stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
youngest, I’m the tallest.”

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
return Mr. Bennet’s visit, and determining when they should ask him to
dinner.

[Illustration: “I’m the tallest”]




[Illustration:

     “He rode a black horse”
]




CHAPTER III.


[Illustration]

Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,
Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been
delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
hopes of Mr. Bingley’s heart were entertained.

“If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,”
said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others equally well
married, I shall have nothing to wish for.”

In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet’s visit, and sat about ten
minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard
much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining, from an upper
window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.

An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards despatched; and already had
Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her
housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley
was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to
accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite
disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that
he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never
settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a
little by starting the idea of his

[Illustration:

     “When the Party entered”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a
report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and
seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a
number of ladies; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing
that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from London,
his five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the
assembly-room, it consisted of only five altogether: Mr. Bingley, his
two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man.

Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike: he had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,
with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and
the report, which was in general circulation within five minutes after
his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen
pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was
much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust
which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be
proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his
large estate in Derbyshire could save him from having a most forbidding,
disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his
friend.

Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
people in the room: he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one
himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced
only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in
the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his
having slighted one of her daughters.

Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been
standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and
Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his
friend to join it.

“Come, Darcy,” said he, “I must have you dance. I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
dance.”

“I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am
particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this, it
would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
stand up with.”

“I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Bingley, “for a
kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my
life as I have this evening; and there are several of them, you see,
uncommonly pretty.”

“_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,” said Mr.
Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.

“Oh, she is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one
of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”

[Illustration:

“She is tolerable”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Which do you mean?” and turning round, he looked for a moment at
Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his own, and coldly said,
“She is tolerable: but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”

Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She told the story,
however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,
playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.

The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.
Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been
distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her
mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane’s
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they
had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a
book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that all his wife’s
views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he
had a very different story to hear.

“Oh, my dear Mr. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had a most
delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.
Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well
she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with
her twice. Only think of _that_, my dear: he actually danced with her
twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand
up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody
can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and
asked her for the two next. Then, the two third he danced with Miss
King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane
again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_----”

“If he had had any compassion for _me_,” cried her husband impatiently,
“he would not have danced half so much! For God’s sake, say no more of
his partners. O that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance!”

“Oh, my dear,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “I am quite delighted with him. He
is so excessively handsome! and his sisters are charming women. I never
in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the
lace upon Mrs. Hurst’s gown----”

Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit, and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.

“But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much by not
suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at
all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited, that there was no enduring
him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my
dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.


[Illustration]

When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister how very much
she admired him.

“He is just what a young-man ought to be,” said she, “sensible,
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! so much ease,
with such perfect good breeding!”

“He is also handsome,” replied Elizabeth, “which a young man ought
likewise to be if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.”

“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I
did not expect such a compliment.”

“Did not you? _I_ did for you. But that is one great difference between
us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What
could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in
the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
stupider person.”

“Dear Lizzy!”

“Oh, you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life.”

“I would wish not to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
what I think.”

“I know you do: and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! Affectation of candour is common enough; one meets with it
everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design,--to take the
good of everybody’s character and make it still better, and say nothing
of the bad,--belongs to you alone. And so, you like this man’s sisters,
too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.”

“Certainly not, at first; but they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbour in her.”

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced: their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and
with a judgment, too, unassailed by any attention to herself, she was
very little disposed to approve them. They were, in fact, very fine
ladies; not deficient in good-humour when they were pleased, nor in the
power of being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited.
They were rather handsome; had been educated in one of the first private
seminaries in town; had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds; were in the
habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people
of rank; and were, therefore, in every respect entitled to think well of
themselves and meanly of others. They were of a respectable family in
the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their
memories than that their brother’s fortune and their own had been
acquired by trade.

Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate,
but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and
sometimes made choice of his county; but, as he was now provided with a
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
purchase.

His sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but
though he was now established only as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
means unwilling to preside at his table; nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of
age two years when he was tempted, by an accidental recommendation, to
look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it, for half an
hour; was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied
with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.

Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a
great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he
never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy’s regard, Bingley
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgment the highest opinion. In
understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means
deficient; but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,
reserved, and fastidious; and his manners, though well bred, were not
inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared; Darcy was continually
giving offence.

The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
characteristic. Bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier
girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him;
there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted
with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel
more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people
in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had
felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or
pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty; but she smiled too
much.

Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so; but still they admired
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom
they should not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl; and their brother felt authorized by such
commendation to think of her as he chose.




[Illustration: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER V.


[Illustration]

Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. The
distinction had, perhaps, been felt too strongly. It had given him a
disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town;
and, quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about
a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge; where he
could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by
business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For,
though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the
contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive,
friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. James’s had made him
courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
Elizabeth’s intimate friend.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a
ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.

“_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs. Bennet, with civil
self-command, to Miss Lucas. “_You_ were Mr. Bingley’s first choice.”

“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”

“Oh, you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed, I rather believe he
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
about Mr. Robinson.”

“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson: did not
I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson’s asking him how he liked our Meryton
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty
women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
answering immediately to the last question, ‘Oh, the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt: there cannot be two opinions on that point.’”

“Upon my word! Well, that was very decided, indeed--that does seem as
if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”

“_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,” said
Charlotte. “Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
is he? Poor Eliza! to be only just _tolerable_.”

“I beg you will not put it into Lizzy’s head to be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips.”

[Illustration: “Without once opening his lips”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Are you quite sure, ma’am? Is not there a little mistake?” said Jane.
“I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.”

“Ay, because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
could not help answering her; but she said he seemed very angry at being
spoke to.”

“Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane, “that he never speaks much unless
among his intimate acquaintance. With _them_ he is remarkably
agreeable.”

“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it
was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had to come
to the ball in a hack chaise.”

“I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,” said Miss Lucas, “but I
wish he had danced with Eliza.”

“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with _him_,
if I were you.”

“I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.”

“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend _me_ so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
to be proud.”

“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive
_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.”

“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be
proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of
ourselves; vanity to what we would have others think of us.”

“If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with his
sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day.”

“Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,” said Mrs.
Bennet; “and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle
directly.”

The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
would; and the argument ended only with the visit.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.


[Illustration]

The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit
was returned in due form. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on the
good-will of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,
a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards the
two eldest. By Jane this attention was received with the greatest
pleasure; but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of
everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value, as arising,
in all probability, from the influence of their brother’s admiration. It
was generally evident, whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her; and
to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane
united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and an
uniform cheerfulness of manner, which would guard her from the
suspicions of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend, Miss
Lucas.

“It may, perhaps, be pleasant,” replied Charlotte, “to be able to impose
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be
so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the
dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every
attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without
encouragement. In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show _more_
affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he
may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.”

“But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If _I_ can
perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton indeed not to
discover it too.”

“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane’s disposition as you do.”

“But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavor to conceal
it, he must find it out.”

“Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But though Bingley and Jane
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and as they
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should
therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his
attention. When she is secure of him, there will be leisure for falling
in love as much as she chooses.”

“Your plan is a good one,” replied Elizabeth, “where nothing is in
question but the desire of being well married; and if I were determined
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But
these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet she
cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard, nor of its
reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four
dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,
and has since dined in company with him four times. This is not quite
enough to make her understand his character.”

“Not as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she might
only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must
remember that four evenings have been also spent together--and four
evenings may do a great deal.”

“Yes: these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both
like Vingt-un better than Commerce, but with respect to any other
leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.”

“Well,” said Charlotte, “I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if
she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a
chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a
twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. If
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other, or
ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the
least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your
life.”

“You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.”

Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley’s attention to her sister, Elizabeth
was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some
interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely
allowed her to be pretty: he had looked at her without admiration at the
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she had
hardly a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry
in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and
pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those
of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of
this she was perfectly unaware: to her he was only the man who made
himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough
to dance with.

He began to wish to know more of her; and, as a step towards conversing
with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so
drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas’s, where a large party were
assembled.

“What does Mr. Darcy mean,” said she to Charlotte, “by listening to my
conversation with Colonel Forster?”

“That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.”

“But if he does it any more, I shall certainly let him know that I see
what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by
being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”

[Illustration: “The entreaties of several” [_Copyright 1894 by George
Allen._]]

On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have
any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such
a subject to him, which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she
turned to him and said,--

“Did not you think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well
just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at
Meryton?”

“With great energy; but it is a subject which always makes a lady
energetic.”

“You are severe on us.”

“It will be _her_ turn soon to be teased,” said Miss Lucas. “I am going
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”

“You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me
to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken a
musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of
hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas’s persevering, however,
she added, “Very well; if it must be so, it must.” And gravely glancing
at Mr. Darcy, “There is a very fine old saying, which everybody here is
of course familiar with--‘Keep your breath to cool your porridge,’--and
I shall keep mine to swell my song.”

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she
would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
impatient for display.

Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited
manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she
had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who with
some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in
dancing at one end of the room.

Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas
was his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:--

“What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There is
nothing like dancing, after all. I consider it as one of the first
refinements of polished societies.”

“Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst
the less polished societies of the world: every savage can dance.”

Sir William only smiled. “Your friend performs delightfully,” he
continued, after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.”

“You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.”

“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do
you often dance at St. James’s?”

“Never, sir.”

“Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?”

“It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.”

“You have a house in town, I conclude?”

Mr. Darcy bowed.

“I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself, for I am fond of
superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of
London would agree with Lady Lucas.”

He paused in hopes of an answer: but his companion was not disposed to
make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was
struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
her,--

“My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow
me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You
cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is before you.”
And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy, who, though
extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,--

“Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you
not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.”

Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of
her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at
all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.

“You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me
the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us
for one half hour.”

“Mr. Darcy is all politeness,” said Elizabeth, smiling.

“He is, indeed: but considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we
cannot wonder at his complaisance; for who would object to such a
partner?”

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured
her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some
complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley,--

“I can guess the subject of your reverie.”

“I should imagine not.”

“You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many
evenings in this manner,--in such society; and, indeed, I am quite of
your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the
noise--the nothingness, and yet the self-importance, of all these
people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!”

“Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more
agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”

Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he
would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.
Mr. Darcy replied, with great intrepidity,--

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet.”

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet!” repeated Miss Bingley. “I am all astonishment.
How long has she been such a favourite? and pray when am I to wish you
joy?”

“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady’s
imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love
to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”

“Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider the matter as
absolutely settled. You will have a charming mother-in-law, indeed, and
of course she will be always at Pemberley with you.”

He listened to her with perfect indifference, while she chose to
entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her
that all was safe, her wit flowed along.




[Illustration:

     “A note for Miss Bennet”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER VII.


[Illustration]

Mr. Bennet’s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,
in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother’s
fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply
the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left her four thousand pounds.

She had a sister married to a Mr. Philips, who had been a clerk to their
father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade.

The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt, and
to a milliner’s shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions:
their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and, however bare of
news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn
some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both
with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in
the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was
the head-quarters.

Their visits to Mrs. Philips were now productive of the most interesting
intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of the
officers’ names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret,
and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr. Philips
visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity
unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr.
Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their
mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of
an ensign.

After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.
Bennet coolly observed,--

“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two
of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but
I am now convinced.”

Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and
her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the
next morning to London.

“I am astonished, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “that you should be so
ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly
of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own, however.”

“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”

“Yes; but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”

“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I
had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must
so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly
foolish.”

“My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will
not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when I
liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at my
heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,
should want one of my girls, I shall not say nay to him; and I thought
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William’s in
his regimentals.”

“Mamma,” cried Lydia, “my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson’s as they did when they first
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke’s library.”

Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a
note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
for an answer. Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was
eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,--

“Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.”

“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud.

     /* NIND “My dear friend, */

     “If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and
     me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our
     lives; for a whole day’s _tête-à-tête_ between two women can never
     end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of
     this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.
     Yours ever,

“CAROLINE BINGLEY.”

“With the officers!” cried Lydia: “I wonder my aunt did not tell us of
_that_.”

“Dining out,” said Mrs. Bennet; “that is very unlucky.”

“Can I have the carriage?” said Jane.

“No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to
rain; and then you must stay all night.”

“That would be a good scheme,” said Elizabeth, “if you were sure that
they would not offer to send her home.”

“Oh, but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley’s chaise to go to Meryton;
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.”

“I had much rather go in the coach.”

“But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They are
wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are not they?”

[Illustration: Cheerful prognostics]

“They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.”

“But if you have got them to-day,” said Elizabeth, “my mother’s purpose
will be answered.”

She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses
were engaged; Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad
day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it
rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was
delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;
Jane certainly could not come back.

“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Mrs. Bennet, more than
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the next
morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her
contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:--

     /* NIND “My dearest Lizzie, */

     “I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be
     imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will
     not hear of my returning home till I am better. They insist also on
     my seeing Mr. Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear
     of his having been to me--and, excepting a sore throat and a
     headache, there is not much the matter with me.

“Yours, etc.”

“Well, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
aloud, “if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she
should die--it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.”

“Oh, I am not at all afraid of her dying. People do not die of little
trifling colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays
there, it is all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the
carriage.”

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, determined to go to her, though the
carriage was not to be had: and as she was no horsewoman, walking was
her only alternative. She declared her resolution.

“How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get
there.”

“I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.”

“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to send for the
horses?”

“No, indeed. I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing,
when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.”

“I admire the activity of your benevolence,” observed Mary, “but every
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,
exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.”

“We will go as far as Meryton with you,” said Catherine and Lydia.
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off
together.

“If we make haste,” said Lydia, as they walked along, “perhaps we may
see something of Captain Carter, before he goes.”

In Meryton they parted: the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one
of the officers’ wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
over puddles, with impatient activity, and finding herself at last
within view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face
glowing with the warmth of exercise.

She was shown into the breakfast parlour, where all but Jane were
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day in such
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt
for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their
brother’s manners there was something better than politeness--there was
good-humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr. Hurst
nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the
brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion and doubt as to
the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was
thinking only of his breakfast.

Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well
enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in her note how much she longed
for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal,
however, to much conversation; and when Miss Bingley left them together,
could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the
extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended
her.

When breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came; and having
examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught a
violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head
ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment, nor were
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had in fact
nothing to do elsewhere.

When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only
wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern
at parting with her that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer
of the chaise into an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the
present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was
despatched to Longbourn, to acquaint the family with her stay, and bring
back a supply of clothes.

[Illustration:

“The Apothecary came”
]




[Illustration:

“covering a screen”
]




CHAPTER VIII.


[Illustration]

At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the
much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley, she could not make a very
favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
indifference towards Jane, when not immediately before them, restored
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike.

Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could
regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his
attentions to herself most pleasing; and they prevented her feeling
herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the
others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.
Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to
eat, drink, and play at cards, who, when he found her prefer a plain
dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.

When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were
pronounced to be very bad indeed,--a mixture of pride and impertinence:
she had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst
thought the same, and added,--

“She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent
walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really
looked almost wild.”

“She did indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very
nonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about the
country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair so untidy, so blowzy!”

“Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep
in mud, I am absolutely certain, and the gown which had been let down to
hide it not doing its office.”

“Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said Bingley; “but this was
all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well
when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite
escaped my notice.”

“_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley; “and I am
inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your sister_ make such
an exhibition.”

“Certainly not.”

“To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,
above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what could she mean by
it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,
a most country-town indifference to decorum.”

“It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,” said
Bingley.

“I am afraid, Mr. Darcy,” observed Miss Bingley, in a half whisper,
“that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine
eyes.”

“Not at all,” he replied: “they were brightened by the exercise.” A
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again,--

“I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet,--she is really a very sweet
girl,--and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such
a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no
chance of it.”

“I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in
Meryton?”

“Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.”

“That is capital,” added her sister; and they both laughed heartily.

“If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside,” cried Bingley, “it
would not make them one jot less agreeable.”

“But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any
consideration in the world,” replied Darcy.

To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
their dear friend’s vulgar relations.

With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to her room on
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.
She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and
when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go
down stairs herself. On entering the drawing-room, she found the whole
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high, she declined it, and making her sister the
excuse, said she would amuse herself, for the short time she could stay
below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.

“Do you prefer reading to cards?” said he; “that is rather singular.”

“Miss Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, “despises cards. She is a great
reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.”

“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,” cried Elizabeth; “I
am _not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.”

“In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,” said Bingley; “and
I hope it will soon be increased by seeing her quite well.”

Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table
where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her
others; all that his library afforded.

“And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
credit; but I am an idle fellow; and though I have not many, I have more
than I ever looked into.”

Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those
in the room.

“I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left
so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at
Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!”

“It ought to be good,” he replied: “it has been the work of many
generations.”

“And then you have added so much to it yourself--you are always buying
books.”

“I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as
these.”

“Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of
that noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be
half as delightful as Pemberley.”

“I wish it may.”

“But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a
finer county in England than Derbyshire.”

“With all my heart: I will buy Pemberley itself, if Darcy will sell it.”

“I am talking of possibilities, Charles.”

“Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get
Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.”

Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave her very little
attention for her book; and, soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near
the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest
sister, to observe the game.

“Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?” said Miss Bingley: “will
she be as tall as I am?”

“I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s height, or
rather taller.”

“How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me
so much. Such a countenance, such manners, and so extremely accomplished
for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.”

“It is amazing to me,” said Bingley, “how young ladies can have patience
to be so very accomplished as they all are.”

“All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?”

“Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and
net purses. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this; and I am
sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without
being informed that she was very accomplished.”

“Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has
too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no
otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen; but I am very
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I
cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen in the whole range of my
acquaintance that are really accomplished.”

“Nor I, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley.

“Then,” observed Elizabeth, “you must comprehend a great deal in your
idea of an accomplished woman.”

“Yes; I do comprehend a great deal in it.”

“Oh, certainly,” cried his faithful assistant, “no one can be really
esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met
with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and, besides all
this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
will be but half deserved.”

“All this she must possess,” added Darcy; “and to all she must yet add
something more substantial in the improvement of her mind by extensive
reading.”

“I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.
I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.”

“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all
this?”

“_I_ never saw such a woman. _I_ never saw such capacity, and taste, and
application, and elegance, as you describe, united.”

Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the
room.

“Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, “is
one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other
sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I daresay, it
succeeds; but, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.”

“Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,
“there is meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend
to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is
despicable.”

Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to
continue the subject.

Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and
that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones’s being sent for
immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most
eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so
unwilling to comply with their brother’s proposal; and it was settled
that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters
declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,
however, by duets after supper; while he could find no better relief to
his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every
possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.




[Illustration:

M^{rs} Bennet and her two youngest girls

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER IX.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister’s room, and in the
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
own judgment of her situation. The note was immediately despatched, and
its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.

Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been
very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was
not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her
restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She
would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss
Bingley’s appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes
that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.

“Indeed I have, sir,” was her answer. “She is a great deal too ill to be
moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass
a little longer on your kindness.”

“Removed!” cried Bingley. “It must not be thought of. My sister, I am
sure, will not hear of her removal.”

“You may depend upon it, madam,” said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,
“that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she
remains with us.”

Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.

“I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such good friends, I do not
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a
vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to
_her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect
over that gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is
equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I
hope, though you have but a short lease.”

“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.”

“That is exactly what I should have supposed of you,” said Elizabeth.

“You begin to comprehend me, do you?” cried he, turning towards her.

“Oh yes--I understand you perfectly.”

“I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
through, I am afraid, is pitiful.”

“That is as it happens. It does not necessarily follow that a deep,
intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.”

“Lizzy,” cried her mother, “remember where you are, and do not run on in
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.”

“I did not know before,” continued Bingley, immediately, “that you were
a studier of character. It must be an amusing study.”

“Yes; but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have at
least that advantage.”

“The country,” said Darcy, “can in general supply but few subjects for
such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and
unvarying society.”

“But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
observed in them for ever.”

“Yes, indeed,” cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a
country neighbourhood. “I assure you there is quite as much of _that_
going on in the country as in town.”

Everybody was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,
turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete
victory over him, continued her triumph,--

“I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for
my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal
pleasanter, is not it, Mr. Bingley?”

“When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it; and
when I am in town, it is pretty much the same. They have each their
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”

“Ay, that is because you have the right disposition. But that
gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to think the country was nothing
at all.”

“Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken,” said Elizabeth, blushing for her
mother. “You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which
you must acknowledge to be true.”

“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with
many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”

Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his
countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked her if
Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away.

“Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir
William is, Mr. Bingley--is not he? so much the man of fashion! so
genteel and so easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
important and never open their mouths quite mistake the matter.”

“Did Charlotte dine with you?”

“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For
my part, Mr. Bingley, _I_ always keep servants that can do their own
work; _my_ daughters are brought up differently. But everybody is to
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I
assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that _I_ think
Charlotte so _very_ plain; but then she is our particular friend.”

“She seems a very pleasant young woman,” said Bingley.

“Oh dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself
has often said so, and envied me Jane’s beauty. I do not like to boast
of my own child; but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody
better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own
partiality. When she was only fifteen there was a gentleman at my
brother Gardiner’s in town so much in love with her, that my
sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away.
But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he
wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.”

“And so ended his affection,” said Elizabeth, impatiently. “There has
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!”

“I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love,” said Darcy.

“Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is
strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.”

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to
Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was
unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part,
indeed, without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and
soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of
her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to
each other during the whole visit; and the result of it was, that the
youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.

Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle’s good dinners and her
own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was
very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the
ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be
the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer
to this sudden attack was delightful to her mother’s ear.

“I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and, when
your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of
the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill?”

Lydia declared herself satisfied. “Oh yes--it would be much better to
wait till Jane was well; and by that time, most likely, Captain Carter
would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball,” she
added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel
Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.”

Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations’ behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on _fine eyes_.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER X.


[Illustration]

The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who
continued, though slowly, to mend; and, in the evening, Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room. The loo table, however, did not appear.
Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching
the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off his attention by
messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and
Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.

Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual
commendations of the lady either on his hand-writing, or on the evenness
of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was
exactly in unison with her opinion of each.

“How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!”

He made no answer.

“You write uncommonly fast.”

“You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.”

“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a
year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!”

“It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of to yours.”

“Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.”

“I have already told her so once, by your desire.”

“I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mend
pens remarkably well.”

“Thank you--but I always mend my own.”

“How can you contrive to write so even?”

He was silent.

“Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp,
and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
Grantley’s.”

“Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At
present I have not room to do them justice.”

“Oh, it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you
always write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?”

“They are generally long; but whether always charming, it is not for me
to determine.”

“It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with
ease cannot write ill.”

“That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,” cried her
brother, “because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much
for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?”

“My style of writing is very different from yours.”

“Oh,” cried Miss Bingley, “Charles writes in the most careless way
imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.”

“My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them; by which
means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.”

“Your humility, Mr. Bingley,” said Elizabeth, “must disarm reproof.”

“Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of
humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an
indirect boast.”

“And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?”

“The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you
think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with
quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any
attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.
Bennet this morning, that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of
panegyric, of compliment to yourself; and yet what is there so very
laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?”

“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the
foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I
believed what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this
moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless
precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.”

“I daresay you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you
would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as
dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were
mounting your horse, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had better stay
till next week,’ you would probably do it--you would probably not
go--and, at another word, might stay a month.”

“You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth, “that Mr. Bingley did
not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much
more than he did himself.”

“I am exceedingly gratified,” said Bingley, “by your converting what my
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am
afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means
intend; for he would certainly think the better of me if, under such a
circumstance, I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I
could.”

“Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?”

“Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter--Darcy must speak for
himself.”

“You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,
but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to
stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and
the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering
one argument in favour of its propriety.”

“To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit
with you.”

“To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
either.”

“You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of
friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make
one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason
one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have
supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the
circumstance occurs, before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour
thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases, between friend and friend,
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no
very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?”

“Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange
with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties?”

“By all means,” cried Bingley; “let us hear all the particulars, not
forgetting their comparative height and size, for that will have more
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure
you that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with
myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not
know a more awful object than Darcy on particular occasions, and in
particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,
when he has nothing to do.”

Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was
rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly
resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense.

“I see your design, Bingley,” said his friend. “You dislike an argument,
and want to silence this.”

“Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.”

“What you ask,” said Elizabeth, “is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.
Darcy had much better finish his letter.”

Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.

When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth
for the indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to
the pianoforte, and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the
way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she
seated herself.

Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister; and while they were thus employed,
Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy’s eyes were fixed
on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of
admiration to so great a man, and yet that he should look at her because
he disliked her was still more strange. She could only imagine, however,
at last, that she drew his notice because there was something about her
more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in
any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked
him too little to care for his approbation.

After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a
lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near
Elizabeth, said to her,--

“Do you not feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an
opportunity of dancing a reel?”

She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some
surprise at her silence.

“Oh,” said she, “I heard you before; but I could not immediately
determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of
their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell
you that I do not want to dance a reel at all; and now despise me if you
dare.”

“Indeed I do not dare.”

Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody, and Darcy had
never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really
believed that, were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he
should be in some danger.

Miss Bingley saw, or suspected, enough to be jealous; and her great
anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some
assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.

She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.

“I hope,” said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the
next day, “you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;
and if you can compass it, to cure the younger girls of running after
the officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,
which your lady possesses.”

[Illustration:

     “No, no; stay where you are”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?”

“Oh yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be placed
in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the
judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different
lines. As for your Elizabeth’s picture, you must not attempt to have it
taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?”

“It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression; but their
colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be
copied.”

At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and
Elizabeth herself.

“I did not know that you intended to walk,” said Miss Bingley, in some
confusion, lest they had been overheard.

“You used us abominably ill,” answered Mrs. Hurst, “running away without
telling us that you were coming out.”

Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk
by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness,
and immediately said,--

“This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the
avenue.”

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,
laughingly answered,--

“No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to
uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a
fourth. Good-bye.”

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled about, in the hope of
being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered
as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.




[Illustration:

     “Piling up the fire”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XI.


[Illustration]

When the ladies removed after dinner Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and
seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawing-room,
where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of
pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were
during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers
of conversation were considerable. They could describe an entertainment
with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their
acquaintance with spirit.

But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;
Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had
something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed
himself directly to Miss Bennet with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst
also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness
and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. He was full of joy and
attention. The first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed, at his desire,
to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be farther from the
door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else.
Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
delight.

When tea was over Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
card-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.
Darcy did not wish for cards, and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open
petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the
silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.
Hurst had, therefore, nothing to do but to stretch himself on one of the
sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book. Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and
rings, joined now and then in her brother’s conversation with Miss
Bennet.

Miss Bingley’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.
Darcy’s progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she was
perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She
could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
question and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the
second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it
is to spend an evening in this way! I declare, after all, there is no
enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a
book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not
an excellent library.”

No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when, hearing
her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
towards him and said,--

“By the bye Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not
some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
pleasure.”

“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he
chooses, before it begins; but as for the ball, it is quite a settled
thing, and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough I shall send
round my cards.”

“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the
day.”

“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say; but it would not be
near so much like a ball.”

Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards got up and walked about
the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at
whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the
desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more; and,
turning to Elizabeth, said,--

“Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so
long in one attitude.”

Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility: Mr. Darcy looked
up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down
the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would
interfere. What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his
meaning--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him.

“Not at all,” was her answer; “but, depend upon it, he means to be
severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask
nothing about it.”

Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in
anything, and persevered, therefore, in requiring an explanation of his
two motives.

“I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as soon
as she allowed him to speak. “You either choose this method of passing
the evening because you are in each other’s confidence, and have secret
affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures
appear to the greatest advantage in walking: if the first, I should be
completely in your way; and if the second, I can admire you much better
as I sit by the fire.”

“Oh, shocking!” cried Miss Bingley. “I never heard anything so
abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?”

“Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,” said Elizabeth. “We
can all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimate
as you are, you must know how it is to be done.”

“But upon my honour I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy has not
yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of temper and presence of mind! No,
no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will not expose
ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr.
Darcy may hug himself.”

“Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!” cried Elizabeth. “That is an
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintance. I dearly love a
laugh.”

“Miss Bingley,” said he, “has given me credit for more than can be. The
wisest and best of men,--nay, the wisest and best of their actions,--may
be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a
joke.”

“Certainly,” replied Elizabeth, “there are such people, but I hope I am
not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good. Follies
and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own, and I
laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely what
you are without.”

“Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study of
my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong
understanding to ridicule.”

“Such as vanity and pride.”

“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real
superiority of mind--pride will be always under good regulation.”

Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.

“Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume,” said Miss Bingley;
“and pray what is the result?”

“I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it
himself without disguise.”

“No,” said Darcy, “I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough,
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
for. It is, I believe, too little yielding; certainly too little for the
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of
others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against myself. My
feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper
would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost is lost for
ever.”

“_That_ is a failing, indeed!” cried Elizabeth. “Implacable resentment
_is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I
really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me.”

“There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular
evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.”

“And _your_ defect is a propensity to hate everybody.”

“And yours,” he replied, with a smile, “is wilfully to misunderstand
them.”

“Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a
conversation in which she had no share. “Louisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. Hurst.”

Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
opened; and Darcy, after a few moments’ recollection, was not sorry for
it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII.


[Illustration]

In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to receive
them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.
Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very
well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
contrary, of being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley’s carriage immediately, and at
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.

The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on
Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay; for her jealousy and dislike
of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.

The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
she felt herself to be right.

To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence: Elizabeth had been at
Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked; and Miss
Bingley was uncivil to _her_ and more teasing than usual to himself. He
wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
should _now_ escape him--nothing that could elevate her with the hope of
influencing his felicity; sensible that, if such an idea had been
suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday: and though they were at
one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.

On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
all, took place. Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to
see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of
the whole party in the liveliest spirits.

They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their
father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its
animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and
Elizabeth.

They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human
nature; and had some new extracts to admire and some new observations of
threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information
for them of a different sort. Much had been done, and much had been said
in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers
had dined lately with their uncle; a private had been flogged; and it
had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII


[Illustration]

“I hope, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, “that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.”

“Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in; and I hope _my_ dinners
are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.”

“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman and a stranger.”

Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled. “A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr.
Bingley, I am sure. Why, Jane--you never dropped a word of this--you sly
thing! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley.
But--good Lord! how unlucky! there is not a bit of fish to be got
to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell. I must speak to Hill this
moment.”

“It is _not_ Mr. Bingley,” said her husband; “it is a person whom I
never saw in the whole course of my life.”

This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once.

After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus
explained:--“About a month ago I received this letter, and about a
fortnight ago I answered it; for I thought it a case of some delicacy,
and requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who,
when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he
pleases.”

“Oh, my dear,” cried his wife, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned.
Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
to do something or other about it.”

Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail.
They had often attempted it before: but it was a subject on which Mrs.
Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.

“It certainly is a most iniquitous affair,” said Mr. Bennet; “and
nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.
But if you will listen to his letter, you may, perhaps, be a little
softened by his manner of expressing himself.”

“No, that I am sure I shall not: and I think it was very impertinent of
him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false
friends. Why could not he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father
did before him?”

“Why, indeed, he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
head, as you will hear.”

     /* RIGHT “Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, _15th October_. */

“Dear Sir,

     “The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
     father always gave me much uneasiness; and, since I have had the
     misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the
     breach: but, for some time, I was kept back by my own doubts,
     fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be
     on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be
     at variance.”--‘There, Mrs. Bennet.’--“My mind, however, is now
     made up on the subject; for, having received ordination at Easter,
     I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of
     the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis
     de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the
     valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest
     endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her
     Ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies
     which are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman,
     moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing
     of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on
     these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures of
     good-will are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my
     being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly
     overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered
     olive branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the
     means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to
     apologize for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make
     them every possible amends; but of this hereafter. If you should
     have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself
     the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday,
     November 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass on your
     hospitality till the Saturday se’nnight following, which I can do
     without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting
     to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other
     clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day. I remain, dear sir,
     with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your
     well-wisher and friend,

“WILLIAM COLLINS.”

“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,”
said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a most
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and, I doubt not, will
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
indulgent as to let him come to us again.”

“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however; and, if
he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
discourage him.”

“Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can mean
to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his
credit.”

Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for Lady
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
his parishioners whenever it were required.

“He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him out. There
is something very pompous in his style. And what can he mean by
apologizing for being next in the entail? We cannot suppose he would
help it, if he could. Can he be a sensible man, sir?”

“No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the
reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
letter which promises well. I am impatient to see him.”

“In point of composition,” said Mary, “his letter does not seem
defective. The idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
think it is well expressed.”

To Catherine and Lydia neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for
their mother, Mr. Collins’s letter had done away much of her ill-will,
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which
astonished her husband and daughters.

Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need
of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall,
heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and
stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated
before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of
daughters, said he had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this
instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not
doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage. This
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.
Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily,--

“You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
prove so; for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so
oddly.”

“You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.”

“Ah, sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things,
I know, are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed.”

“I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more, but, perhaps,
when we are better acquainted----”

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins’s admiration. The
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;
and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet’s
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his
own future property. The dinner, too, in its turn, was highly admired;
and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellence of its
cookery was owing. But here he was set right by Mrs. Bennet, who assured
him, with some asperity, that they were very well able to keep a good
cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged
pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared
herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologize for about a
quarter of an hour.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV


[Illustration]

During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady
Catherine de Bourgh’s attention to his wishes, and consideration for his
comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen
better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him
to more than usual solemnity of manner; and with a most important aspect
he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a
person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself
experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to
approve of both the discourses which he had already had the honour of
preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
people, he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her.
She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she
made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally for a week or
two to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
to suggest some herself,--some shelves in the closets upstairs.

“That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Mrs. Bennet, “and I
dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies
in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?”

“The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane
from Rosings Park, her Ladyship’s residence.”

“I think you said she was a widow, sir? has she any family?”

“She has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
extensive property.”

“Ah,” cried Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, “then she is better off than
many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?”

“She is a most charming young lady, indeed. Lady Catherine herself says
that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the
handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks
the young woman of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly
constitution, which has prevented her making that progress in many
accomplishments which she could not otherwise have failed of, as I am
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.”

“Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at
court.”

“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived
the British Court of its brightest ornament. Her Ladyship seemed pleased
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to
ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her
charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess; and that the most
elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by
her. These are the kind of little things which please her Ladyship, and
it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to
pay.”

“You judge very properly,” said Mr. Bennet; “and it is happy for you
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?”

“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time; and though I
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
give them as unstudied an air as possible.”

El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha



por Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra





El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha


  
Tasa

  
Testimonio de las erratas

  
El Rey

  
Al Duque de Béjar

  
Prólogo

  
Al libro de don Quijote de la Mancha



Que trata de la condición y ejercicio del famoso
hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha

Que trata de la primera salida que de su tierra hizo
el ingenioso don Quijote

Donde se cuenta la graciosa manera que tuvo don
Quijote en armarse caballero

De lo que le sucedió a nuestro caballero cuando salió
de la venta

Donde se prosigue la narración de la desgracia de
nuestro caballero

Del donoso y grande escrutinio que el cura y el
barbero hicieron en la librería de nuestro ingenioso hidalgo

De la segunda salida de nuestro buen caballero don
Quijote de la Mancha

Del buen suceso que el valeroso don Quijote tuvo en
la espantable y jamás imaginada aventura de los molinos de viento, con
otros sucesos dignos de felice recordación

Donde se concluye y da fin a la estupenda batalla que
el gallardo vizcaíno y el valiente manchego tuvieron

De lo que más le avino a don Quijote con el vizcaíno, y
del peligro en que se vio con una turba de yangüeses

De lo que le sucedió a don Quijote con unos
cabreros

De lo que contó un cabrero a los que estaban con don
Quijote

Donde se da fin al cuento de la pastora Marcela, con
otros sucesos

Donde se ponen los versos desesperados del difunto
pastor, con otros no esperados sucesos

Donde se cuenta la desgraciada aventura que se topó
don Quijote en topar con unos desalmados yangüeses

De lo que le sucedió al ingenioso hidalgo en la venta
que él imaginaba ser castillo

Donde se prosiguen los innumerables trabajos que el
bravo don Quijote y su buen escudero Sancho Panza pasaron en la venta
que, por su mal, pensó que era castillo

Donde se cuentan las razones que pasó Sancho Panza
con su señor Don Quijote, con otras aventuras dignas de ser
contadas

De las discretas razones que Sancho pasaba con su
amo, y de la aventura que le sucedió con un cuerpo muerto, con otros
acontecimientos famosos

De la jamás vista ni oída aventura que con más poco
peligro fue acabada de famoso caballero en el mundo, como la que acabó
el valeroso don Quijote de la Mancha

Que trata de la alta aventura y rica ganancia del
yelmo de Mambrino, con otras cosas sucedidas a nuestro invencible
caballero

De la libertad que dio don Quijote a muchos
desdichados que, mal de su grado, los llevaban donde no quisieran
ir

De lo que le aconteció al famoso don Quijote en
Sierra Morena, que fue una de las más raras aventuras que en esta
verdadera historia se cuentan

Donde se prosigue la aventura de la Sierra
Morena

Que trata de las estrañas cosas que en Sierra Morena
sucedieron al valiente caballero de la Mancha, y de la imitación que
hizo a la penitencia de Beltenebros

Donde se prosiguen las finezas que de enamorado hizo
don Quijote en Sierra Morena

De cómo salieron con su intención el cura y el
barbero, con otras cosas dignas de que se cuenten en esta grande
historia

Que trata de la nueva y agradable aventura que al
cura y barbero sucedió en la mesma sierra

Que trata de la discreción de la hermosa Dorotea,
con otras cosas de mucho gusto y pasatiempo

Que trata del gracioso artificio y orden que se tuvo
en sacar a nuestro enamorado caballero de la asperísima penitencia en
que se había puesto

De los sabrosos razonamientos que pasaron entre don
Quijote y Sancho Panza, su escudero, con otros sucesos

Que trata de lo que sucedió en la venta a toda la
cuadrilla de don Quijote

Donde se cuenta la novela del Curioso
impertinente

Donde se prosigue la novela del Curioso
impertinente

Donde se da fin a la novela del Curioso
impertinente

Que trata de la brava y descomunal batalla que don
Quijote tuvo con unos cueros de vino tinto, con otros raros sucesos
que en la venta le sucedieron

Que prosigue la historia de la famosa infanta
Micomicona, con otras graciosas aventuras

Que trata del curioso discurso que hizo don
Quijote de las armas y las letras

Donde el cautivo cuenta su vida y sucesos

Donde se prosigue la historia del cautivo

Donde todavía prosigue el cautivo su suceso

Que trata de lo que más sucedió en la venta y de
otras muchas cosas dignas de saberse

Donde se cuenta la agradable historia del mozo de
mulas, con otros estraños acaecimientos en la venta sucedidos]

Donde se prosiguen los inauditos sucesos de la
venta

Donde se acaba de averiguar la duda del yelmo de
Mambrino y de la albarda, y otras aventuras sucedidas, con toda
verdad

De la notable aventura de los cuadrilleros, y la
gran ferocidad de nuestro buen caballero don Quijote

Del estraño modo con que fue encantado don Quijote
de la Mancha, con otros famosos sucesos

Donde prosigue el canónigo la materia de los
libros de caballerías, con otras cosas dignas de su ingenio

Donde se trata del discreto coloquio que Sancho
Panza tuvo con su señor don Quijote

De las discretas altercaciones que don Quijote y el
canónigo tuvieron, con otros sucesos

Que trata de lo que contó el cabrero a todos los que
llevaban a don Quijote

De la pendencia que don Quijote tuvo con el cabrero,
con la rara aventura de los deceplinantes, a quien dio felice fin a
costa de su sudor


Segunda parte del ingenioso caballero don Quijote de la Mancha


  
Tasa

  
Fee de erratas

  
Aprobaciones

  
Dedicatoria, al conde de Lemos

  
Prólogo al lector



De lo que el cura y el barbero pasaron con don
Quijote cerca de su enfermedad

Que trata de la notable pendencia que Sancho Panza
tuvo con la sobrina y ama de don Quijote, con otros sujetos
graciosos

Del ridículo razonamiento que pasó entre don Quijote,
Sancho Panza y el bachiller Sansón Carrasco

Donde Sancho Panza satisface al bachiller Sansón
Carrasco de sus dudas y preguntas, con otros sucesos dignos de saberse
y de contarse

De la discreta y graciosa plática que pasó entre Sancho
Panza y su mujer Teresa Panza, y otros sucesos dignos de felice
recordación

De lo que le pasó a Don Quijote con su sobrina y con
su ama, y es uno de los importantes capítulos de toda la historia

De lo que pasó don Quijote con su escudero, con otros
sucesos famosísimos

Donde se cuenta lo que le sucedió a don Quijote,
yendo a ver su señora Dulcinea del Toboso

Donde se cuenta lo que en él se verá

Donde se cuenta la industria que Sancho tuvo para
encantar a la señora Dulcinea, y de otros sucesos tan ridículos como
verdaderos

De la estraña aventura que le sucedió al valeroso don
Quijote con el carro, o carreta, de Las Cortes de la Muerte

De la estraña aventura que le sucedió al valeroso don
Quijote con el bravo Caballero de los Espejos

Donde se prosigue la aventura del Caballero del
Bosque, con el discreto, nuevo y suave coloquio que pasó entre los dos
escuderos

Donde se prosigue la aventura del Caballero del
Bosque

Donde se cuenta y da noticia de quién era el Caballero
de los Espejos y su escudero

De lo que sucedió a don Quijote con un discreto
caballero de la Mancha

De donde se declaró el último punto y estremo adonde
llegó y pudo llegar el inaudito ánimo de don Quijote, con la
felicemente acabada aventura de los leones

De lo que sucedió a don Quijote en el castillo o
casa del Caballero del Verde Gabán, con otras cosas extravagantes

Donde se cuenta la aventura del pastor enamorado, con
otros en verdad graciosos sucesos

Donde se cuentan las bodas de Camacho el rico, con el
suceso de Basilio el pobre

Donde se prosiguen las bodas de Camacho, con otros
gustosos sucesos

Donde se da cuenta de la grande aventura de la cueva
de Montesinos, que está en el corazón de la Mancha, a quien dio felice
cima el valeroso don Quijote de la Mancha

De las admirables cosas que el estremado don
Quijote contó que había visto en la profunda cueva de Montesinos, cuya
imposibilidad y grandeza hace que se tenga esta aventura por
apócrifa

Donde se cuentan mil zarandajas tan impertinentes
como necesarias al verdadero entendimiento desta grande historia

Donde se apunta la aventura del rebuzno y la graciosa
del titerero, con las memorables adivinanzas del mono adivino

Donde se prosigue la graciosa aventura del titerero,
con otras cosas en verdad harto buenas

Donde se da cuenta quiénes eran maese Pedro y su
mono, con el mal suceso que don Quijote tuvo en la aventura del
rebuzno, que no la acabó como él quisiera y como lo tenía pensado

De cosas que dice Benengeli que las sabrá quien le
leyere, si las lee con atención

De la famosa aventura del barco encantado

De lo que le avino a don Quijote con una bella
cazadora

Que trata de muchas y grandes cosas

De la respuesta que dio don Quijote a su
reprehensor, con otros graves y graciosos sucesos

De la sabrosa plática que la duquesa y sus
doncellas pasaron con Sancho Panza, digna de que se lea y de que se
note

Que cuenta de la noticia que se tuvo de cómo se
había de desencantar la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso, que es una de las
aventuras más famosas deste libro

Donde se prosigue la noticia que tuvo don Quijote
del desencanto de Dulcinea, con otros admirables sucesos

Donde se cuenta la estraña y jamás imaginada
aventura de la dueña Dolorida, alias de la condesa Trifaldi, con una
carta que Sancho Panza escribió a su mujer Teresa Panza

Donde se prosigue la famosa aventura de la dueña
Dolorida

Donde se cuenta la que dio de su mala andanza la
dueña Dolorida

Donde la Trifaldi prosigue su estupenda y memorable
historia

De cosas que atañen y tocan a esta aventura y a esta
memorable historia

De la venida de Clavileño, con el fin desta dilatada
aventura

De los consejos que dio don Quijote a Sancho Panza
antes que fuese a gobernar la ínsula, con otras cosas bien
consideradas

De los consejos segundos que dio don Quijote a
Sancho Panza

Cómo Sancho Panza fue llevado al gobierno, y de la
estraña aventura que en el castillo sucedió a don Quijote

De cómo el gran Sancho Panza tomó la posesión de su
ínsula, y del modo que comenzó a gobernar

Del temeroso espanto cencerril y gatuno que recibió
don Quijote en el discurso de los amores de la enamorada
Altisidora

Donde se prosigue cómo se portaba Sancho Panza en
su gobierno

De lo que le sucedió a don Quijote con doña
Rodríguez, la dueña de la duquesa, con otros acontecimientos dignos de
escritura y de memoria eterna

De lo que le sucedió a Sancho Panza rondando su
ínsula

Donde se declara quién fueron los encantadores y
verdugos que azotaron a la dueña y pellizcaron y arañaron a don
Quijote, con el suceso que tuvo el paje que llevó la carta a Teresa
Sancha, mujer de Sancho Panza

Del progreso del gobierno de Sancho Panza, con otros
sucesos tales como buenos

Donde se cuenta la aventura de la segunda dueña
Dolorida, o Angustiada, llamada por otro nombre doña Rodríguez

Del fatigado fin y remate que tuvo el gobierno de
Sancho Panza

Que trata de cosas tocantes a esta historia, y no a
otra alguna

De cosas sucedidas a Sancho en el camino, y otras que
no hay más que ver

De la descomunal y nunca vista batalla que pasó entre
don Quijote de la Mancha y el lacayo Tosilos, en la defensa de la hija
de la dueña doña Rodríguez

Que trata de cómo don Quijote se despidió del duque,
y de lo que le sucedió con la discreta y desenvuelta Altisidora,
doncella de la duquesa

Que trata de cómo menudearon sobre don Quijote
aventuras tantas, que no se daban vagar unas a otras

Donde se cuenta del extraordinario suceso, que se
puede tener por aventura, que le sucedió a don Quijote

De lo que sucedió a don Quijote yendo a Barcelona

De lo que le sucedió a don Quijote en la entrada de
Barcelona, con otras cosas que tienen más de lo verdadero que de lo
discreto

Que trata de la aventura de la cabeza encantada, con
otras niñerías que no pueden dejar de contarse

De lo mal que le avino a Sancho Panza con la visita
de las galeras, y la nueva aventura de la hermosa morisca

Que trata de la aventura que más pesadumbre dio a
don Quijote de cuantas hasta entonces le habían sucedido

Donde se da noticia quién era el de la Blanca Luna,
con la libertad de Don Gregorio, y de otros sucesos

Que trata de lo que verá el que lo leyere, o lo oirá
el que lo escuchare leer

De la resolución que tomó don Quijote de hacerse
pastor y seguir la vida del campo, en tanto que se pasaba el año de su
promesa, con otros sucesos en verdad gustosos y buenos

De la cerdosa aventura que le aconteció a don
Quijote

Del más raro y más nuevo suceso que en todo el
discurso desta grande historia avino a don Quijote

Que sigue al de sesenta y nueve, y trata de cosas no
escusadas para la claridad desta historia

De lo que a don Quijote le sucedió con su escudero
Sancho yendo a su aldea

De cómo don Quijote y Sancho llegaron a su
aldea

De los agüeros que tuvo don Quijote al entrar de
su aldea, con otros sucesos que adornan y acreditan esta grande
historia

De cómo don Quijote cayó malo, y del testamento que
hizo, y su muerte




El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha

TASA

Yo, Juan Gallo de Andrada, escribano de Cámara del Rey nuestro señor, de
los que residen en su Consejo, certifico y doy fe que, habiendo visto por
los señores dél un libro intitulado El ingenioso hidalgo de la Mancha,
compuesto por Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, tasaron cada pliego del dicho
libro a tres maravedís y medio; el cual tiene ochenta y tres pliegos, que
al dicho precio monta el dicho libro docientos y noventa maravedís y medio,
en que se ha de vender en papel; y dieron licencia para que a este precio
se pueda vender, y mandaron que esta tasa se ponga al principio del dicho
libro, y no se pueda vender sin ella. Y, para que dello conste, di la
presente en Valladolid, a veinte días del mes de deciembre de mil y
seiscientos y cuatro años.

Juan Gallo de Andrada.

TESTIMONIO DE LAS ERRATAS

Este libro no tiene cosa digna que no corresponda a su original; en
testimonio de lo haber correcto, di esta fee. En el Colegio de la Madre de
Dios de los Teólogos de la Universidad de Alcalá, en primero de diciembre
de 1604 años.

El licenciado Francisco Murcia de la Llana.

EL REY

Por cuanto por parte de vos, Miguel de Cervantes, nos fue fecha relación
que habíades compuesto un libro intitulado El ingenioso hidalgo de la
Mancha, el cual os había costado mucho trabajo y era muy útil y provechoso,
nos pedistes y suplicastes os mandásemos dar licencia y facultad para le
poder imprimir, y previlegio por el tiempo que fuésemos servidos, o como la
nuestra merced fuese; lo cual visto por los del nuestro Consejo, por cuanto
en el dicho libro se hicieron las diligencias que la premática últimamente
por nos fecha sobre la impresión de los libros dispone, fue acordado que
debíamos mandar dar esta nuestra cédula para vos, en la dicha razón; y nos
tuvímoslo por bien. Por la cual, por os hacer bien y merced, os damos
licencia y facultad para que vos, o la persona que vuestro poder hubiere, y
no otra alguna, podáis imprimir el dicho libro, intitulado El ingenioso
hidalgo de la Mancha, que desuso se hace mención, en todos estos nuestros
reinos de Castilla, por tiempo y espacio de diez años, que corran y se
cuenten desde el dicho día de la data desta nuestra cédula; so pena que la
persona o personas que, sin tener vuestro poder, lo imprimiere o vendiere,
o hiciere imprimir o vender, por el mesmo caso pierda la impresión que
hiciere, con los moldes y aparejos della; y más, incurra en pena de
cincuenta mil maravedís cada vez que lo contrario hiciere. La cual dicha
pena sea la tercia parte para la persona que lo acusare, y la otra tercia
parte para nuestra Cámara, y la otra tercia parte para el juez que lo
sentenciare. Con tanto que todas las veces que hubiéredes de hacer imprimir
el dicho libro, durante el tiempo de los dichos diez años, le traigáis al
nuestro Consejo, juntamente con el original que en él fue visto, que va
rubricado cada plana y firmado al fin dél de Juan Gallo de Andrada, nuestro
Escribano de Cámara, de los que en él residen, para saber si la dicha
impresión está conforme el original; o traigáis fe en pública forma de cómo
por corretor nombrado por nuestro mandado, se vio y corrigió la dicha
impresión por el original, y se imprimió conforme a él, y quedan impresas
las erratas por él apuntadas, para cada un libro de los que así fueren
impresos, para que se tase el precio que por cada volume hubiéredes de
haber. Y mandamos al impresor que así imprimiere el dicho libro, no imprima
el principio ni el primer pliego dél, ni entregue más de un solo libro con
el original al autor, o persona a cuya costa lo imprimiere, ni otro alguno,
para efeto de la dicha correción y tasa, hasta que antes y primero el dicho
libro esté corregido y tasado por los del nuestro Consejo; y, estando
hecho, y no de otra manera, pueda imprimir el dicho principio y primer
pliego, y sucesivamente ponga esta nuestra cédula y la aprobación, tasa y
erratas, so pena de caer e incurrir en las penas contenidas en las leyes y
premáticas destos nuestros reinos. Y mandamos a los del nuestro Consejo, y
a otras cualesquier justicias dellos, guarden y cumplan esta nuestra cédula
y lo en ella contenido. Fecha en Valladolid, a veinte y seis días del mes
de setiembre de mil y seiscientos y cuatro años.

YO, EL REY.

Por mandado del Rey nuestro señor:

Juan de Amezqueta.


AL DUQUE DE BÉJAR,

marqués de Gibraleón, conde de Benalcázar y Bañares, vizconde de La Puebla de
Alcocer, señor de las villas de Capilla, Curiel y Burguillos

En fe del buen acogimiento y honra que hace Vuestra Excelencia a toda
suerte de libros, como príncipe tan inclinado a favorecer las buenas artes,
mayormente las que por su nobleza no se abaten al servicio y granjerías del
vulgo, he determinado de sacar a luz al Ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la
Mancha, al abrigo del clarísimo nombre de Vuestra Excelencia, a quien, con
el acatamiento que debo a tanta grandeza, suplico le reciba agradablemente
en su protección, para que a su sombra, aunque desnudo de aquel precioso
ornamento de elegancia y erudición de que suelen andar vestidas las obras
que se componen en las casas de los hombres que saben, ose parecer
seguramente en el juicio de algunos que, continiéndose en los límites de su
ignorancia, suelen condenar con más rigor y menos justicia los trabajos
ajenos; que, poniendo los ojos la prudencia de Vuestra Excelencia en mi
buen deseo, fío que no desdeñará la cortedad de tan humilde servicio.

Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.

PRÓLOGO

Desocupado lector: sin juramento me podrás creer que quisiera que este
libro, como hijo del entendimiento, fuera el más hermoso, el más gallardo y
más discreto que pudiera imaginarse. Pero no he podido yo contravenir al
orden de naturaleza; que en ella cada cosa engendra su semejante. Y así,
¿qué podrá engendrar el estéril y mal cultivado ingenio mío, sino la
historia de un hijo seco, avellanado, antojadizo y lleno de pensamientos
varios y nunca imaginados de otro alguno, bien como quien se engendró en
una cárcel, donde toda incomodidad tiene su asiento y donde todo triste
ruido hace su habitación? El sosiego, el lugar apacible, la amenidad de los
campos, la serenidad de los cielos, el murmurar de las fuentes, la quietud
del espíritu son grande parte para que las musas más estériles se muestren
fecundas y ofrezcan partos al mundo que le colmen de maravilla y de
contento. Acontece tener un padre un hijo feo y sin gracia alguna, y el
amor que le tiene le pone una venda en los ojos para que no vea sus faltas,
antes las juzga por discreciones y lindezas y las cuenta a sus amigos por
agudezas y donaires. Pero yo, que, aunque parezco padre, soy padrastro de
Don Quijote, no quiero irme con la corriente del uso, ni suplicarte, casi
con las lágrimas en los ojos, como otros hacen, lector carísimo, que
perdones o disimules las faltas que en este mi hijo vieres; y ni eres su
pariente ni su amigo, y tienes tu alma en tu cuerpo y tu libre albedrío
como el más pintado, y estás en tu casa, donde eres señor della, como el
rey de sus alcabalas, y sabes lo que comúnmente se dice: que debajo de mi
manto, al rey mato. Todo lo cual te esenta y hace libre de todo respecto y
obligación; y así, puedes decir de la historia todo aquello que te
pareciere, sin temor que te calunien por el mal ni te premien por el bien
que dijeres della.

Sólo quisiera dártela monda y desnuda, sin el ornato de prólogo, ni de la
inumerabilidad y catálogo de los acostumbrados sonetos, epigramas y elogios
que al principio de los libros suelen ponerse. Porque te sé decir que,
aunque me costó algún trabajo componerla, ninguno tuve por mayor que hacer
esta prefación que vas leyendo. Muchas veces tomé la pluma para escribille,
y muchas la dejé, por no saber lo que escribiría; y, estando una suspenso,
con el papel delante, la pluma en la oreja, el codo en el bufete y la mano
en la mejilla, pensando lo que diría, entró a deshora un amigo mío,
gracioso y bien entendido, el cual, viéndome tan imaginativo, me preguntó
la causa; y, no encubriéndosela yo, le dije que pensaba en el prólogo que
había de hacer a la historia de don Quijote, y que me tenía de suerte que
ni quería hacerle, ni menos sacar a luz las hazañas de tan noble caballero.

— Porque, ¿cómo queréis vos que no me tenga confuso el qué dirá el antiguo
legislador que llaman vulgo cuando vea que, al cabo de tantos años como ha
que duermo en el silencio del olvido, salgo ahora, con todos mis años a
cuestas, con una leyenda seca como un esparto, ajena de invención, menguada
de estilo, pobre de concetos y falta de toda erudición y doctrina; sin
acotaciones en las márgenes y sin anotaciones en el fin del libro, como veo
que están otros libros, aunque sean fabulosos y profanos, tan llenos de
sentencias de Aristóteles, de Platón y de toda la caterva de filósofos, que
admiran a los leyentes y tienen a sus autores por hombres leídos, eruditos
y elocuentes? ¡Pues qué, cuando citan la Divina Escritura! No dirán sino
que son unos santos Tomases y otros doctores de la Iglesia; guardando en
esto un decoro tan ingenioso, que en un renglón han pintado un enamorado
destraído y en otro hacen un sermoncico cristiano, que es un contento y un
regalo oílle o leelle. De todo esto ha de carecer mi libro, porque ni tengo
qué acotar en el margen, ni qué anotar en el fin, ni menos sé qué autores
sigo en él, para ponerlos al principio, como hacen todos, por las letras
del A.B.C., comenzando en Aristóteles y acabando en Xenofonte y en Zoílo o
Zeuxis, aunque fue maldiciente el uno y pintor el otro. También ha de
carecer mi libro de sonetos al principio, a lo menos de sonetos cuyos
autores sean duques, marqueses, condes, obispos, damas o poetas
celebérrimos; aunque, si yo los pidiese a dos o tres oficiales amigos, yo
sé que me los darían, y tales, que no les igualasen los de aquellos que
tienen más nombre en nuestra España. En fin, señor y amigo mío —proseguí—,
yo determino que el señor don Quijote se quede sepultado en sus archivos en
la Mancha, hasta que el cielo depare quien le adorne de tantas cosas como
le faltan; porque yo me hallo incapaz de remediarlas, por mi insuficiencia
y pocas letras, y porque naturalmente soy poltrón y perezoso de andarme
buscando autores que digan lo que yo me sé decir sin ellos. De aquí nace la
suspensión y elevamiento, amigo, en que me hallastes; bastante causa para
ponerme en ella la que de mí habéis oído.

Oyendo lo cual mi amigo, dándose una palmada en la frente y disparando en
una carga de risa, me dijo:

— Por Dios, hermano, que agora me acabo de desengañar de un engaño en que he
estado todo el mucho tiempo que ha que os conozco, en el cual siempre os he
tenido por discreto y prudente en todas vuestras aciones. Pero agora veo
que estáis tan lejos de serlo como lo está el cielo de la tierra. ¿Cómo que
es posible que cosas de tan poco momento y tan fáciles de remediar puedan
tener fuerzas de suspender y absortar un ingenio tan maduro como el
vuestro, y tan hecho a romper y atropellar por otras dificultades mayores?
A la fe, esto no nace de falta de habilidad, sino de sobra de pereza y
penuria de discurso. ¿Queréis ver si es verdad lo que digo? Pues estadme
atento y veréis cómo, en un abrir y cerrar de ojos, confundo todas vuestras
dificultades y remedio todas las faltas que decís que os suspenden y
acobardan para dejar de sacar a la luz del mundo la historia de vuestro
famoso don Quijote, luz y espejo de toda la caballería andante.

— Decid —le repliqué yo, oyendo lo que me decía—: ¿de qué modo pensáis
llenar el vacío de mi temor y reducir a claridad el caos de mi confusión?

A lo cual él dijo:

— Lo primero en que reparáis de los sonetos, epigramas o elogios que os
faltan para el principio, y que sean de personajes graves y de título, se
puede remediar en que vos mesmo toméis algún trabajo en hacerlos, y después
los podéis bautizar y poner el nombre que quisiéredes, ahijándolos al
Preste Juan de las Indias o al Emperador de Trapisonda, de quien yo sé que
hay noticia que fueron famosos poetas; y cuando no lo hayan sido y hubiere
algunos pedantes y bachilleres que por detrás os muerdan y murmuren desta
verdad, no se os dé dos maravedís; porque, ya que os averigüen la mentira,
no os han de cortar la mano con que lo escribistes.

»En lo de citar en las márgenes los libros y autores de donde sacáredes las
sentencias y dichos que pusiéredes en vuestra historia, no hay más sino
hacer, de manera que venga a pelo, algunas sentencias o latines que vos
sepáis de memoria, o, a lo menos, que os cuesten poco trabajo el buscalle;
como será poner, tratando de libertad y cautiverio:

Non bene pro toto libertas venditur auro.

Y luego, en el margen, citar a Horacio, o a quien lo dijo. Si tratáredes
del poder de la muerte, acudir luego con:

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres.

Si de la amistad y amor que Dios manda que se tenga al enemigo, entraros
luego al punto por la Escritura Divina, que lo podéis hacer con tantico de
curiosidad, y decir las palabras, por lo menos, del mismo Dios: Ego autem
dico vobis: diligite inimicos vestros. Si tratáredes de malos pensamientos,
acudid con el Evangelio: De corde exeunt cogitationes malae. Si de la
instabilidad de los amigos, ahí está Catón, que os dará su dístico:

Donec eris felix, multos numerabis amicos,
tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.

Y con estos latinicos y otros tales os tendrán siquiera por gramático, que
el serlo no es de poca honra y provecho el día de hoy.

»En lo que toca el poner anotaciones al fin del libro, seguramente lo
podéis hacer desta manera: si nombráis algún gigante en vuestro libro,
hacelde que sea el gigante Golías, y con sólo esto, que os costará casi
nada, tenéis una grande anotación, pues podéis poner: El gigante Golías, o
Goliat, fue un filisteo a quien el pastor David mató de una gran pedrada en
el valle de Terebinto, según se cuenta en el Libro de los Reyes, en el
capítulo que vos halláredes que se escribe. Tras esto, para mostraros
hombre erudito en letras humanas y cosmógrafo, haced de modo como en
vuestra historia se nombre el río Tajo, y veréisos luego con otra famosa
anotación, poniendo: El río Tajo fue así dicho por un rey de las Españas;
tiene su nacimiento en tal lugar y muere en el mar océano, besando los
muros de la famosa ciudad de Lisboa; y es opinión que tiene las arenas de
oro, etc. Si tratáredes de ladrones, yo os diré la historia de Caco, que la
sé de coro; si de mujeres rameras, ahí está el obispo de Mondoñedo, que os
prestará a Lamia, Laida y Flora, cuya anotación os dará gran crédito; si de
crueles, Ovidio os entregará a Medea; si de encantadores y hechiceras,
Homero tiene a Calipso, y Virgilio a Circe; si de capitanes valerosos, el
mesmo Julio César os prestará a sí mismo en sus Comentarios, y Plutarco os
dará mil Alejandros. Si tratáredes de amores, con dos onzas que sepáis de
la lengua toscana, toparéis con León Hebreo, que os hincha las medidas. Y
si no queréis andaros por tierras extrañas, en vuestra casa tenéis a
Fonseca, Del amor de Dios, donde se cifra todo lo que vos y el más
ingenioso acertare a desear en tal materia. En resolución, no hay más sino
que vos procuréis nombrar estos nombres, o tocar estas historias en la
vuestra, que aquí he dicho, y dejadme a mí el cargo de poner las
anotaciones y acotaciones; que yo os voto a tal de llenaros las márgenes y
de gastar cuatro pliegos en el fin del libro.

»Vengamos ahora a la citación de los autores que los otros libros tienen,
que en el vuestro os faltan. El remedio que esto tiene es muy fácil, porque
no habéis de hacer otra cosa que buscar un libro que los acote todos, desde
la A hasta la Z, como vos decís. Pues ese mismo abecedario pondréis vos en
vuestro libro; que, puesto que a la clara se vea la mentira, por la poca
necesidad que vos teníades de aprovecharos dellos, no importa nada; y quizá
alguno habrá tan simple, que crea que de todos os habéis aprovechado en la
simple y sencilla historia vuestra; y, cuando no sirva de otra cosa, por lo
menos servirá aquel largo catálogo de autores a dar de improviso autoridad
al libro. Y más, que no habrá quien se ponga a averiguar si los seguistes o
no los seguistes, no yéndole nada en ello. Cuanto más que, si bien caigo en
la cuenta, este vuestro libro no tiene necesidad de ninguna cosa de
aquellas que vos decís que le falta, porque todo él es una invectiva contra
los libros de caballerías, de quien nunca se acordó Aristóteles, ni dijo
nada San Basilio, ni alcanzó Cicerón; ni caen debajo de la cuenta de sus
fabulosos disparates las puntualidades de la verdad, ni las observaciones
de la astrología; ni le son de importancia las medidas geométricas, ni la
confutación de los argumentos de quien se sirve la retórica; ni tiene para
qué predicar a ninguno, mezclando lo humano con lo divino, que es un género
de mezcla de quien no se ha de vestir ningún cristiano entendimiento. Sólo
tiene que aprovecharse de la imitación en lo que fuere escribiendo; que,
cuanto ella fuere más perfecta, tanto mejor será lo que se escribiere. Y,
pues esta vuestra escritura no mira a más que a deshacer la autoridad y
cabida que en el mundo y en el vulgo tienen los libros de caballerías, no
hay para qué andéis mendigando sentencias de filósofos, consejos de la
Divina Escritura, fábulas de poetas, oraciones de retóricos, milagros de
santos, sino procurar que a la llana, con palabras significantes, honestas
y bien colocadas, salga vuestra oración y período sonoro y festivo;
pintando, en todo lo que alcanzáredes y fuere posible, vuestra intención,
dando a entender vuestros conceptos sin intricarlos y escurecerlos.
Procurad también que, leyendo vuestra historia, el melancólico se mueva a
risa, el risueño la acreciente, el simple no se enfade, el discreto se
admire de la invención, el grave no la desprecie, ni el prudente deje de
alabarla. En efecto, llevad la mira puesta a derribar la máquina mal
fundada destos caballerescos libros, aborrecidos de tantos y alabados de
muchos más; que si esto alcanzásedes, no habríades alcanzado poco.

Con silencio grande estuve escuchando lo que mi amigo me decía, y de tal
manera se imprimieron en mí sus razones que, sin ponerlas en disputa, las
aprobé por buenas y de ellas mismas quise hacer este prólogo; en el cual
verás, lector suave, la discreción de mi amigo, la buena ventura mía en
hallar en tiempo tan necesitado tal consejero, y el alivio tuyo en hallar
tan sincera y tan sin revueltas la historia del famoso don Quijote de la
Mancha, de quien hay opinión, por todos los habitadores del distrito del
campo de Montiel, que fue el más casto enamorado y el más valiente
caballero que de muchos años a esta parte se vio en aquellos contornos. Yo
no quiero encarecerte el servicio que te hago en darte a conocer tan noble
y tan honrado caballero, pero quiero que me agradezcas el conocimiento que
tendrás del famoso Sancho Panza, su escudero, en quien, a mi parecer, te
doy cifradas todas las gracias escuderiles que en la caterva de los libros
vanos de caballerías están esparcidas.

Y con esto, Dios te dé salud, y a mí no olvide. Vale.

AL LIBRO DE DON QUIJOTE DE LA MANCHA

Urganda la desconocida
Si de llegarte a los bue-,
libro, fueres con letu-,
no te dirá el boquirru-
que no pones bien los de-.
Mas si el pan no se te cue-
por ir a manos de idio-,
verás de manos a bo-,
aun no dar una en el cla-,
si bien se comen las ma-
por mostrar que son curio-.
Y, pues la expiriencia ense-
que el que a buen árbol se arri-
buena sombra le cobi-,
en Béjar tu buena estre-
un árbol real te ofre-
que da príncipes por fru-,
en el cual floreció un du-
que es nuevo Alejandro Ma-:
llega a su sombra, que a osa-
favorece la fortu-.
De un noble hidalgo manche-
contarás las aventu-,
a quien ociosas letu-,
trastornaron la cabe-:
damas, armas, caballe-,
le provocaron de mo-,
que, cual Orlando furio-,
templado a lo enamora-,
alcanzó a fuerza de bra-
a Dulcinea del Tobo-.
No indiscretos hieroglí-
estampes en el escu-,
que, cuando es todo figu-,
con ruines puntos se envi-.
Si en la dirección te humi-,

no dirá, mofante, algu-:
''¡Qué don Álvaro de Lu-,
qué Anibal el de Carta-,
qué rey Francisco en Espa-
se queja de la Fortu-!''
Pues al cielo no le plu-
que salieses tan ladi-
como el negro Juan Lati-,
hablar latines rehú-.
No me despuntes de agu-,
ni me alegues con filó-,
porque, torciendo la bo-,
dirá el que entiende la le-,
no un palmo de las ore-:
''¿Para qué conmigo flo-?''
No te metas en dibu-,
ni en saber vidas aje-,
que, en lo que no va ni vie-,

pasar de largo es cordu-.
Que suelen en caperu-
darles a los que grace-;
mas tú quémate las ce-
sólo en cobrar buena fa-;
que el que imprime neceda-
dalas a censo perpe-.
Advierte que es desati-,
siendo de vidrio el teja-,
tomar piedras en las ma-
para tirar al veci-.
Deja que el hombre de jui-,
en las obras que compo-,
se vaya con pies de plo-;
que el que saca a luz pape-
para entretener donce-
escribe a tontas y a lo-.

AMADÍS DE GAULA A DON QUIJOTE DE LA MANCHA

Soneto

Tú, que imitaste la llorosa vida
que tuve, ausente y desdeñado sobre
el gran ribazo de la Peña Pobre,
de alegre a penitencia reducida;
tú, a quien los ojos dieron la bebida
de abundante licor, aunque salobre,
y alzándote la plata, estaño y cobre,
te dio la tierra en tierra la comida,
vive seguro de que eternamente,
en tanto, al menos, que en la cuarta esfera,
sus caballos aguije el rubio Apolo,
tendrás claro renombre de valiente;
tu patria será en todas la primera;
tu sabio autor, al mundo único y solo.

DON BELIANÍS DE GRECIA A DON QUIJOTE DE LA MANCHA

Soneto

Rompí, corté, abollé, y dije y hice
más que en el orbe caballero andante;
fui diestro, fui valiente, fui arrogante;
mil agravios vengué, cien mil deshice.
Hazañas di a la Fama que eternice;
fui comedido y regalado amante;
fue enano para mí todo gigante,
y al duelo en cualquier punto satisfice.
Tuve a mis pies postrada la Fortuna,
y trajo del copete mi cordura
a la calva Ocasión al estricote.
Más, aunque sobre el cuerno de la luna
siempre se vio encumbrada mi ventura,
tus proezas envidio, ¡oh gran Quijote!

LA SEÑORA ORIANA A DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO

Soneto

¡Oh, quién tuviera, hermosa Dulcinea,
por más comodidad y más reposo,
a Miraflores puesto en el Toboso,
y trocara sus Londres con tu aldea!
¡Oh, quién de tus deseos y librea
alma y cuerpo adornara, y del famoso
caballero que hiciste venturoso
mirara alguna desigual pelea!
¡Oh, quién tan castamente se escapara
del señor Amadís como tú hiciste
del comedido hidalgo don Quijote!
Que así envidiada fuera, y no envidiara,
y fuera alegre el tiempo que fue triste,
y gozara los gustos sin escote.

GANDALÍN, ESCUDERO DE AMADÍS DE GAULA, A SANCHO PANZA, ESCUDERO DE DON QUIJOTE

Soneto

Salve, varón famoso, a quien Fortuna,
cuando en el trato escuderil te puso,
tan blanda y cuerdamente lo dispuso,
que lo pasaste sin desgracia alguna.
Ya la azada o la hoz poco repugna
al andante ejercicio; ya está en uso
la llaneza escudera, con que acuso
al soberbio que intenta hollar la luna.
Envidio a tu jumento y a tu nombre,
y a tus alforjas igualmente invidio,
que mostraron tu cuerda providencia.
Salve otra vez, ¡oh Sancho!, tan buen hombre,
que a solo tú nuestro español Ovidio
con buzcorona te hace reverencia.

DEL DONOSO, POETA ENTREVERADO, A SANCHO PANZA Y ROCINANTE

Soy Sancho Panza, escude-
del manchego don Quijo-.
Puse pies en polvoro-,
por vivir a lo discre-;
que el tácito Villadie-
toda su razón de esta-
cifró en una retira-,
según siente Celesti-,
libro, en mi opinión, divi-
si encubriera más lo huma-.
A Rocinante
Soy Rocinante, el famo-
bisnieto del gran Babie-.
Por pecados de flaque-,
fui a poder de un don Quijo-.
Parejas corrí a lo flo-;
mas, por uña de caba-,
no se me escapó ceba-;
que esto saqué a Lazari-
cuando, para hurtar el vi-
al ciego, le di la pa-.

ORLANDO FURIOSO A DON QUIJOTE DE LA MANCHA

Soneto

Si no eres par, tampoco le has tenido:
que par pudieras ser entre mil pares;
ni puede haberle donde tú te hallares,
invito vencedor, jamás vencido.
Orlando soy, Quijote, que, perdido
por Angélica, vi remotos mares,
ofreciendo a la Fama en sus altares
aquel valor que respetó el olvido.
No puedo ser tu igual; que este decoro
se debe a tus proezas y a tu fama,
puesto que, como yo, perdiste el seso.
Mas serlo has mío, si al soberbio moro
y cita fiero domas, que hoy nos llama
iguales en amor con mal suceso.

EL CABALLERO DEL FEBO A DON QUIJOTE DE LA MANCHA

Soneto

A vuestra espada no igualó la mía,
Febo español, curioso cortesano,
ni a la alta gloria de valor mi mano,
que rayo fue do nace y muere el día.
Imperios desprecié; la monarquía
que me ofreció el Oriente rojo en vano
dejé, por ver el rostro soberano
de Claridiana, aurora hermosa mía.
Améla por milagro único y raro,
y, ausente en su desgracia, el propio infierno
temió mi brazo, que domó su rabia.
Mas vos, godo Quijote, ilustre y claro,
por Dulcinea sois al mundo eterno,
y ella, por vos, famosa, honesta y sabia.

DE SOLISDÁN A DON QUIJOTE DE LA MANCHA

Soneto

Maguer, señor Quijote, que sandeces
vos tengan el cerbelo derrumbado,
nunca seréis de alguno reprochado
por home de obras viles y soeces.
Serán vuesas fazañas los joeces,
pues tuertos desfaciendo habéis andado,
siendo vegadas mil apaleado
por follones cautivos y raheces.
Y si la vuesa linda Dulcinea
desaguisado contra vos comete,
ni a vuesas cuitas muestra buen talante,
en tal desmán, vueso conorte sea
que Sancho Panza fue mal alcagüete,
necio él, dura ella, y vos no amante.

DIÁLOGO ENTRE BABIECA Y ROCINANTE

Soneto

B. ¿Cómo estáis, Rocinante, tan delgado?
R. Porque nunca se come, y se trabaja.
B. Pues, ¿qué es de la cebada y de la paja?
R. No me deja mi amo ni un bocado.
B. Andá, señor, que estáis muy mal criado,
pues vuestra lengua de asno al amo ultraja.
R. Asno se es de la cuna a la mortaja.
¿Queréislo ver? Miraldo enamorado.
B. ¿Es necedad amar? R. No es gran prudencia.
B. Metafísico estáis. R. Es que no como.
B. Quejaos del escudero. R. No es bastante.
¿Cómo me he de quejar en mi dolencia,
si el amo y escudero o mayordomo
son tan rocines como Rocinante?

Primera parte del ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha




Capítulo primero. Que trata de la condición y ejercicio del famoso hidalgo
don Quijote de la Mancha

En un lugar de la Mancha, de cuyo nombre no quiero acordarme, no ha mucho
tiempo que vivía un hidalgo de los de lanza en astillero, adarga antigua,
rocín flaco y galgo corredor. Una olla de algo más vaca que carnero,
salpicón las más noches, duelos y quebrantos los sábados, lantejas los
viernes, algún palomino de añadidura los domingos, consumían las tres
partes de su hacienda. El resto della concluían sayo de velarte, calzas de
velludo para las fiestas, con sus pantuflos de lo mesmo, y los días de
entresemana se honraba con su vellorí de lo más fino. Tenía en su casa una
ama que pasaba de los cuarenta, y una sobrina que no llegaba a los veinte,
y un mozo de campo y plaza, que así ensillaba el rocín como tomaba la
podadera. Frisaba la edad de nuestro hidalgo con los cincuenta años; era de
complexión recia, seco de carnes, enjuto de rostro, gran madrugador y amigo
de la caza. Quieren decir que tenía el sobrenombre de Quijada, o Quesada,
que en esto hay alguna diferencia en los autores que deste caso escriben;
aunque, por conjeturas verosímiles, se deja entender que se llamaba
Quejana. Pero esto importa poco a nuestro cuento; basta que en la narración
dél no se salga un punto de la verdad.

Es, pues, de saber que este sobredicho hidalgo, los ratos que estaba
ocioso, que eran los más del año, se daba a leer libros de caballerías, con
tanta afición y gusto, que olvidó casi de todo punto el ejercicio de la
caza, y aun la administración de su hacienda. Y llegó a tanto su curiosidad
y desatino en esto, que vendió muchas hanegas de tierra de sembradura para
comprar libros de caballerías en que leer, y así, llevó a su casa todos
cuantos pudo haber dellos; y de todos, ningunos le parecían tan bien como
los que compuso el famoso Feliciano de Silva, porque la claridad de su
prosa y aquellas entricadas razones suyas le parecían de perlas, y más
cuando llegaba a leer aquellos requiebros y cartas de desafíos, donde en
muchas partes hallaba escrito: La razón de la sinrazón que a mi razón se
hace, de tal manera mi razón enflaquece, que con razón me quejo de la
vuestra fermosura. Y también cuando leía: ...los altos cielos que de
vuestra divinidad divinamente con las estrellas os fortifican, y os hacen
merecedora del merecimiento que merece la vuestra grandeza.

Con estas razones perdía el pobre caballero el juicio, y desvelábase por
entenderlas y desentrañarles el sentido, que no se lo sacara ni las
entendiera el mesmo Aristóteles, si resucitara para sólo ello. No estaba
muy bien con las heridas que don Belianís daba y recebía, porque se
imaginaba que, por grandes maestros que le hubiesen curado, no dejaría de
tener el rostro y todo el cuerpo lleno de cicatrices y señales. Pero, con
todo, alababa en su autor aquel acabar su libro con la promesa de aquella
inacabable aventura, y muchas veces le vino deseo de tomar la pluma y dalle
fin al pie de la letra, como allí se promete; y sin duda alguna lo hiciera,
y aun saliera con ello, si otros mayores y continuos pensamientos no se lo
estorbaran. Tuvo muchas veces competencia con el cura de su lugar —que era
hombre docto, graduado en Sigüenza—, sobre cuál había sido mejor caballero:
Palmerín de Ingalaterra o Amadís de Gaula; mas maese Nicolás, barbero del
mesmo pueblo, decía que ninguno llegaba al Caballero del Febo, y que si
alguno se le podía comparar, era don Galaor, hermano de Amadís de Gaula,
porque tenía muy acomodada condición para todo; que no era caballero
melindroso, ni tan llorón como su hermano, y que en lo de la valentía no le
iba en zaga.

En resolución, él se enfrascó tanto en su letura, que se le pasaban las
noches leyendo de claro en claro, y los días de turbio en turbio; y así,
del poco dormir y del mucho leer, se le secó el celebro, de manera que vino
a perder el juicio. Llenósele la fantasía de todo aquello que leía en los
libros, así de encantamentos como de pendencias, batallas, desafíos,
heridas, requiebros, amores, tormentas y disparates imposibles; y
asentósele de tal modo en la imaginación que era verdad toda aquella
máquina de aquellas sonadas soñadas invenciones que leía, que para él no
había otra historia más cierta en el mundo. Decía él que el Cid Ruy Díaz
había sido muy buen caballero, pero que no tenía que ver con el Caballero
de la Ardiente Espada, que de sólo un revés había partido por medio dos
fieros y descomunales gigantes. Mejor estaba con Bernardo del Carpio,
porque en Roncesvalles había muerto a Roldán el encantado, valiéndose de la
industria de Hércules, cuando ahogó a Anteo, el hijo de la Tierra, entre
los brazos. Decía mucho bien del gigante Morgante, porque, con ser de
aquella generación gigantea, que todos son soberbios y descomedidos, él
solo era afable y bien criado. Pero, sobre todos, estaba bien con Reinaldos
de Montalbán, y más cuando le veía salir de su castillo y robar cuantos
topaba, y cuando en allende robó aquel ídolo de Mahoma que era todo de oro,
según dice su historia. Diera él, por dar una mano de coces al traidor de
Galalón, al ama que tenía, y aun a su sobrina de añadidura.

En efeto, rematado ya su juicio, vino a dar en el más estraño pensamiento
que jamás dio loco en el mundo; y fue que le pareció convenible y
necesario, así para el aumento de su honra como para el servicio de su
república, hacerse caballero andante, y irse por todo el mundo con sus
armas y caballo a buscar las aventuras y a ejercitarse en todo aquello que
él había leído que los caballeros andantes se ejercitaban, deshaciendo todo
género de agravio, y poniéndose en ocasiones y peligros donde, acabándolos,
cobrase eterno nombre y fama. Imaginábase el pobre ya coronado por el valor
de su brazo, por lo menos, del imperio de Trapisonda; y así, con estos tan
agradables pensamientos, llevado del estraño gusto que en ellos sentía, se
dio priesa a poner en efeto lo que deseaba.

Y lo primero que hizo fue limpiar unas armas que habían sido de sus
bisabuelos, que, tomadas de orín y llenas de moho, luengos siglos había que
estaban puestas y olvidadas en un rincón. Limpiólas y aderezólas lo mejor
que pudo, pero vio que tenían una gran falta, y era que no tenían celada de
encaje, sino morrión simple; mas a esto suplió su industria, porque de
cartones hizo un modo de media celada, que, encajada con el morrión, hacían
una apariencia de celada entera. Es verdad que para probar si era fuerte y
podía estar al riesgo de una cuchillada, sacó su espada y le dio dos
golpes, y con el primero y en un punto deshizo lo que había hecho en una
semana; y no dejó de parecerle mal la facilidad con que la había hecho
pedazos, y, por asegurarse deste peligro, la tornó a hacer de nuevo,
poniéndole unas barras de hierro por de dentro, de tal manera que él quedó
satisfecho de su fortaleza; y, sin querer hacer nueva experiencia della, la
diputó y tuvo por celada finísima de encaje.

Fue luego a ver su rocín, y, aunque tenía más cuartos que un real y más
tachas que el caballo de Gonela, que tantum pellis et ossa fuit, le pareció
que ni el Bucéfalo de Alejandro ni Babieca el del Cid con él se igualaban.
Cuatro días se le pasaron en imaginar qué nombre le pondría; porque, según
se decía él a sí mesmo, no era razón que caballo de caballero tan famoso, y
tan bueno él por sí, estuviese sin nombre conocido; y ansí, procuraba
acomodársele de manera que declarase quién había sido, antes que fuese de
caballero andante, y lo que era entonces; pues estaba muy puesto en razón
que, mudando su señor estado, mudase él también el nombre, y le cobrase
famoso y de estruendo, como convenía a la nueva orden y al nuevo ejercicio
que ya profesaba. Y así, después de muchos nombres que formó, borró y
quitó, añadió, deshizo y tornó a hacer en su memoria e imaginación, al fin
le vino a llamar Rocinante: nombre, a su parecer, alto, sonoro y
significativo de lo que había sido cuando fue rocín, antes de lo que ahora
era, que era antes y primero de todos los rocines del mundo.

Puesto nombre, y tan a su gusto, a su caballo, quiso ponérsele a sí mismo,
y en este pensamiento duró otros ocho días, y al cabo se vino a llamar don
Quijote; de donde —como queda dicho— tomaron ocasión los autores desta tan
verdadera historia que, sin duda, se debía de llamar Quijada, y no Quesada,
como otros quisieron decir. Pero, acordándose que el valeroso Amadís no
sólo se había contentado con llamarse Amadís a secas, sino que añadió el
nombre de su reino y patria, por Hepila famosa, y se llamó Amadís de Gaula,
así quiso, como buen caballero, añadir al suyo el nombre de la suya y
llamarse don Quijote de la Mancha, con que, a su parecer, declaraba muy al
vivo su linaje y patria, y la honraba con tomar el sobrenombre della.

Limpias, pues, sus armas, hecho del morrión celada, puesto nombre a su
rocín y confirmándose a sí mismo, se dio a entender que no le faltaba otra
cosa sino buscar una dama de quien enamorarse; porque el caballero andante
sin amores era árbol sin hojas y sin fruto y cuerpo sin alma. Decíase él
a sí:

— Si yo, por malos de mis pecados, o por mi buena suerte, me encuentro por
ahí con algún gigante, como de ordinario les acontece a los caballeros
andantes, y le derribo de un encuentro, o le parto por mitad del cuerpo, o,
finalmente, le venzo y le rindo, ¿no será bien tener a quien enviarle
presentado y que entre y se hinque de rodillas ante mi dulce señora, y diga
con voz humilde y rendido: ''Yo, señora, soy el gigante Caraculiambro,
señor de la ínsula Malindrania, a quien venció en singular batalla el
jamás como se debe alabado caballero don Quijote de la Mancha, el cual me
mandó que me presentase ante vuestra merced, para que la vuestra grandeza
disponga de mí a su talante''?

¡Oh, cómo se holgó nuestro buen caballero cuando hubo hecho este discurso,
y más cuando halló a quien dar nombre de su dama! Y fue, a lo que se cree,
que en un lugar cerca del suyo había una moza labradora de muy buen
parecer, de quien él un tiempo anduvo enamorado, aunque, según se entiende,
ella jamás lo supo, ni le dio cata dello. Llamábase Aldonza Lorenzo, y a
ésta le pareció ser bien darle título de señora de sus pensamientos; y,
buscándole nombre que no desdijese mucho del suyo, y que tirase y se
encaminase al de princesa y gran señora, vino a llamarla Dulcinea del
Toboso, porque era natural del Toboso; nombre, a su parecer, músico y
peregrino y significativo, como todos los demás que a él y a sus cosas
había puesto.




Capítulo II. Que trata de la primera salida que de su tierra hizo el
ingenioso don Quijote

Hechas, pues, estas prevenciones, no quiso aguardar más tiempo a poner en
efeto su pensamiento, apretándole a ello la falta que él pensaba que hacía
en el mundo su tardanza, según eran los agravios que pensaba deshacer,
tuertos que enderezar, sinrazones que emendar, y abusos que mejorar y
deudas que satisfacer. Y así, sin dar parte a persona alguna de su
intención, y sin que nadie le viese, una mañana, antes del día, que era uno
de los calurosos del mes de julio, se armó de todas sus armas, subió sobre
Rocinante, puesta su mal compuesta celada, embrazó su adarga, tomó su
lanza, y, por la puerta falsa de un corral, salió al campo con grandísimo
contento y alborozo de ver con cuánta facilidad había dado principio a su
buen deseo. Mas, apenas se vio en el campo, cuando le asaltó un pensamiento
terrible, y tal, que por poco le hiciera dejar la comenzada empresa; y fue
que le vino a la memoria que no era armado caballero, y que, conforme a ley
de caballería, ni podía ni debía tomar armas con ningún caballero; y,
puesto que lo fuera, había de llevar armas blancas, como novel caballero,
sin empresa en el escudo, hasta que por su esfuerzo la ganase. Estos
pensamientos le hicieron titubear en su propósito; mas, pudiendo más su
locura que otra razón alguna, propuso de hacerse armar caballero del
primero que topase, a imitación de otros muchos que así lo hicieron, según
él había leído en los libros que tal le tenían. En lo de las armas blancas,
pensaba limpiarlas de manera, en teniendo lugar, que lo fuesen más que un
armiño; y con esto se quietó y prosiguió su camino, sin llevar otro que
aquel que su caballo quería, creyendo que en aquello consistía la fuerza de
las aventuras.

Yendo, pues, caminando nuestro flamante aventurero, iba hablando consigo
mesmo y diciendo:

— ¿Quién duda sino que en los venideros tiempos, cuando salga a luz la
verdadera historia de mis famosos hechos, que el sabio que los escribiere
no ponga, cuando llegue a contar esta mi primera salidad tan de mañana,
desta manera?: «Apenas había el rubicundo Apolo tendido por la faz de la
ancha y espaciosa tierra las doradas hebras de sus hermosos cabellos, y
apenas los pequeños y pintados pajarillos con sus arpadas lenguas habían
saludado con dulce y meliflua armonía la venida de la rosada aurora, que,
dejando la blanda cama del celoso marido, por las puertas y balcones del
manchego horizonte a los mortales se mostraba, cuando el famoso caballero
don Quijote de la Mancha, dejando las ociosas plumas, subió sobre su famoso
caballo Rocinante, y comenzó a caminar por el antiguo y conocido campo de
Montiel».

Y era la verdad que por él caminaba. Y añadió diciendo:

— Dichosa edad, y siglo dichoso aquel adonde saldrán a luz las famosas
hazañas mías, dignas de entallarse en bronces, esculpirse en mármoles y
pintarse en tablas para memoria en lo futuro. ¡Oh tú, sabio encantador,
quienquiera que seas, a quien ha de tocar el ser coronista desta peregrina
historia, ruégote que no te olvides de mi buen Rocinante, compañero eterno
mío en todos mis caminos y carreras!

Luego volvía diciendo, como si verdaderamente fuera enamorado:

— ¡Oh princesa Dulcinea, señora deste cautivo corazón!, mucho agravio me
habedes fecho en despedirme y reprocharme con el riguroso afincamiento de
mandarme no parecer ante la vuestra fermosura. Plégaos, señora, de
membraros deste vuestro sujeto corazón, que tantas cuitas por vuestro amor
padece.

Con éstos iba ensartando otros disparates, todos al modo de los que sus
libros le habían enseñado, imitando en cuanto podía su lenguaje. Con esto,
caminaba tan despacio, y el sol entraba tan apriesa y con tanto ardor, que
fuera bastante a derretirle los sesos, si algunos tuviera.

Casi todo aquel día caminó sin acontecerle cosa que de contar fuese, de lo
cual se desesperaba, porque quisiera topar luego luego con quien hacer
experiencia del valor de su fuerte brazo. Autores hay que dicen que la
primera aventura que le avino fue la del Puerto Lápice; otros dicen que la
de los molinos de viento; pero, lo que yo he podido averiguar en este caso,
y lo que he hallado escrito en los Anales de la Mancha, es que él anduvo
todo aquel día, y, al anochecer, su rocín y él se hallaron cansados y
muertos de hambre; y que, mirando a todas partes por ver si descubriría
algún castillo o alguna majada de pastores donde recogerse y adonde pudiese
remediar su mucha hambre y necesidad, vio, no lejos del camino por donde
iba, una venta, que fue como si viera una estrella que, no a los portales,
sino a los alcázares de su redención le encaminaba. Diose priesa a caminar,
y llegó a ella a tiempo que anochecía.

Estaban acaso a la puerta dos mujeres mozas, destas que llaman del partido,
las cuales iban a Sevilla con unos arrieros que en la venta aquella noche
acertaron a hacer jornada; y, como a nuestro aventurero todo cuanto
pensaba, veía o imaginaba le parecía ser hecho y pasar al modo de lo que
había leído, luego que vio la venta, se le representó que era un castillo
con sus cuatro torres y chapiteles de luciente plata, sin faltarle su
puente levadiza y honda cava, con todos aquellos adherentes que semejantes
castillos se pintan. Fuese llegando a la venta, que a él le parecía
castillo, y a poco trecho della detuvo las riendas a Rocinante, esperando
que algún enano se pusiese entre las almenas a dar señal con alguna
trompeta de que llegaba caballero al castillo. Pero, como vio que se
tardaban y que Rocinante se daba priesa por llegar a la caballeriza, se
llegó a la puerta de la venta, y vio a las dos destraídas mozas que allí
estaban, que a él le parecieron dos hermosas doncellas o dos graciosas
damas que delante de la puerta del castillo se estaban solazando. En esto,
sucedió acaso que un porquero que andaba recogiendo de unos rastrojos una
manada de puercos —que, sin perdón, así se llaman— tocó un cuerno, a cuya
señal ellos se recogen, y al instante se le representó a don Quijote lo que
deseaba, que era que algún enano hacía señal de su venida; y así, con
estraño contento, llegó a la venta y a las damas, las cuales, como vieron
venir un hombre de aquella suerte, armado y con lanza y adarga, llenas de
miedo, se iban a entrar en la venta; pero don Quijote, coligiendo por su
huida su miedo, alzándose la visera de papelón y descubriendo su seco y
polvoroso rostro, con gentil talante y voz reposada, les dijo:

— No fuyan las vuestras mercedes ni teman desaguisado alguno; ca a la orden
de caballería que profeso non toca ni atañe facerle a ninguno, cuanto más a
tan altas doncellas como vuestras presencias demuestran.

Mirábanle las mozas, y andaban con los ojos buscándole el rostro, que la
mala visera le encubría; mas, como se oyeron llamar doncellas, cosa tan
fuera de su profesión, no pudieron tener la risa, y fue de manera que don
Quijote vino a correrse y a decirles:

— Bien parece la mesura en las fermosas, y es mucha sandez además la risa
que de leve causa procede; pero no vos lo digo porque os acuitedes ni
mostredes mal talante; que el mío non es de ál que de serviros.

El lenguaje, no entendido de las señoras, y el mal talle de nuestro
caballero acrecentaba en ellas la risa y en él el enojo; y pasara muy
adelante si a aquel punto no saliera el ventero, hombre que, por ser muy
gordo, era muy pacífico, el cual, viendo aquella figura contrahecha, armada
de armas tan desiguales como eran la brida, lanza, adarga y coselete, no
estuvo en nada en acompañar a las doncellas en las muestras de su contento.
Mas, en efeto, temiendo la máquina de tantos pertrechos, determinó de
hablarle comedidamente; y así, le dijo:

— Si vuestra merced, señor caballero, busca posada, amén del lecho (porque
en esta venta no hay ninguno), todo lo demás se hallará en ella en mucha
abundancia.

Viendo don Quijote la humildad del alcaide de la fortaleza, que tal le
pareció a él el ventero y la venta, respondió:

-Para mí, señor castellano, cualquiera cosa basta, porque
mis arreos son las armas,
mi descanso el pelear, etc.

Pensó el huésped que el haberle llamado castellano había sido por haberle
parecido de los sanos de Castilla, aunque él era andaluz, y de los de la
playa de Sanlúcar, no menos ladrón que Caco, ni menos maleante que
estudiantado paje; y así, le respondió:

— Según eso, las camas de vuestra merced serán duras peñas, y su dormir,
siempre velar; y siendo así, bien se puede apear, con seguridad de hallar
en esta choza ocasión y ocasiones para no dormir en todo un año, cuanto más
en una noche.

Y, diciendo esto, fue a tener el estribo a don Quijote, el cual se apeó con
mucha dificultad y trabajo, como aquel que en todo aquel día no se había
desayunado.

Dijo luego al huésped que le tuviese mucho cuidado de su caballo, porque
era la mejor pieza que comía pan en el mundo. Miróle el ventero, y no le
pareció tan bueno como don Quijote decía, ni aun la mitad; y, acomodándole
en la caballeriza, volvió a ver lo que su huésped mandaba, al cual estaban
desarmando las doncellas, que ya se habían reconciliado con él; las cuales,
aunque le habían quitado el peto y el espaldar, jamás supieron ni pudieron
desencajarle la gola, ni quitalle la contrahecha celada, que traía atada
con unas cintas verdes, y era menester cortarlas, por no poderse quitar los
ñudos; mas él no lo quiso consentir en ninguna manera, y así, se quedó toda
aquella noche con la celada puesta, que era la más graciosa y estraña
figura que se pudiera pensar; y, al desarmarle, como él se imaginaba que
aquellas traídas y llevadas que le desarmaban eran algunas principales
señoras y damas de aquel castillo, les dijo con mucho donaire:

-Nunca fuera caballero
de damas tan bien servido
como fuera don Quijote
cuando de su aldea vino:
doncellas curaban dél;
princesas, del su rocino,

o Rocinante, que éste es el nombre, señoras mías, de mi caballo, y don
Quijote de la Mancha el mío; que, puesto que no quisiera descubrirme fasta
que las fazañas fechas en vuestro servicio y pro me descubrieran, la fuerza
de acomodar al propósito presente este romance viejo de Lanzarote ha sido
causa que sepáis mi nombre antes de toda sazón; pero, tiempo vendrá en que
las vuestras señorías me manden y yo obedezca, y el valor de mi brazo
descubra el deseo que tengo de serviros.

Las mozas, que no estaban hechas a oír semejantes retóricas, no respondían
palabra; sólo le preguntaron si quería comer alguna cosa.

— Cualquiera yantaría yo —respondió don Quijote—, porque, a lo que entiendo,
me haría mucho al caso.

A dicha, acertó a ser viernes aquel día, y no había en toda la venta sino
unas raciones de un pescado que en Castilla llaman abadejo, y en Andalucía
bacallao, y en otras partes curadillo, y en otras truchuela. Preguntáronle
si por ventura comería su merced truchuela, que no había otro pescado que
dalle a comer.

— Como haya muchas truchuelas —respondió don Quijote—, podrán servir de una
trucha, porque eso se me da que me den ocho reales en sencillos que en una
pieza de a ocho. Cuanto más, que podría ser que fuesen estas truchuelas
como la ternera, que es mejor que la vaca, y el cabrito que el cabrón.
Pero, sea lo que fuere, venga luego, que el trabajo y peso de las armas no
se puede llevar sin el gobierno de las tripas.

Pusiéronle la mesa a la puerta de la venta, por el fresco, y trújole el
huésped una porción del mal remojado y peor cocido bacallao, y un pan tan
negro y mugriento como sus armas; pero era materia de grande risa verle
comer, porque, como tenía puesta la celada y alzada la visera, no podía
poner nada en la boca con sus manos si otro no se lo daba y ponía; y ansí,
una de aquellas señoras servía deste menester. Mas, al darle de beber, no
fue posible, ni lo fuera si el ventero no horadara una caña, y puesto el un
cabo en la boca, por el otro le iba echando el vino; y todo esto lo recebía
en paciencia, a trueco de no romper las cintas de la celada.

Estando en esto, llegó acaso a la venta un castrador de puercos; y, así
como llegó, sonó su silbato de cañas cuatro o cinco veces, con lo cual
acabó de confirmar don Quijote que estaba en algún famoso castillo, y que
le servían con música, y que el abadejo eran truchas; el pan, candeal; y
las rameras, damas; y el ventero, castellano del castillo, y con esto daba
por bien empleada su determinación y salida. Mas lo que más le fatigaba era
el no verse armado caballero, por parecerle que no se podría poner
legítimamente en aventura alguna sin recebir la orden de caballería.




Capítulo III. Donde se cuenta la graciosa manera que tuvo don Quijote en
armarse caballero

Y así, fatigado deste pensamiento, abrevió su venteril y limitada cena; la
cual acabada, llamó al ventero, y, encerrándose con él en la caballeriza,
se hincó de rodillas ante él, diciéndole:

— No me levantaré jamás de donde estoy, valeroso caballero, fasta que la
vuestra cortesía me otorgue un don que pedirle quiero, el cual redundará en
alabanza vuestra y en pro del género humano.

El ventero, que vio a su huésped a sus pies y oyó semejantes razones,
estaba confuso mirándole, sin saber qué hacerse ni decirle, y porfiaba con
él que se levantase, y jamás quiso, hasta que le hubo de decir que él le
otorgaba el don que le pedía.

— No esperaba yo menos de la gran magnificencia vuestra, señor mío
— respondió don Quijote—; y así, os digo que el don que os he pedido, y de
vuestra liberalidad me ha sido otorgado, es que mañana en aquel día me
habéis de armar caballero, y esta noche en la capilla deste vuestro
castillo velaré las armas; y mañana, como tengo dicho, se cumplirá lo que
tanto deseo, para poder, como se debe, ir por todas las cuatro partes del
mundo buscando las aventuras, en pro de los menesterosos, como está a cargo
de la caballería y de los caballeros andantes, como yo soy, cuyo deseo a
semejantes fazañas es inclinado.

El ventero, que, como está dicho, era un poco socarrón y ya tenía algunos
barruntos de la falta de juicio de su huésped, acabó de creerlo cuando
acabó de oírle semejantes razones, y, por tener qué reír aquella noche,
determinó de seguirle el humor; y así, le dijo que andaba muy acertado en
lo que deseaba y pedía, y que tal prosupuesto era propio y natural de los
caballeros tan principales como él parecía y como su gallarda presencia
mostraba; y que él, ansimesmo, en los años de su mocedad, se había dado a
aquel honroso ejercicio, andando por diversas partes del mundo buscando sus
aventuras, sin que hubiese dejado los Percheles de Málaga, Islas de Riarán,
Compás de Sevilla, Azoguejo de Segovia, la Olivera de Valencia, Rondilla de
Granada, Playa de Sanlúcar, Potro de Córdoba y las Ventillas de Toledo y
otras diversas partes, donde había ejercitado la ligereza de sus pies,
sutileza de sus manos, haciendo muchos tuertos, recuestando muchas viudas,
deshaciendo algunas doncellas y engañando a algunos pupilos, y, finalmente,
dándose a conocer por cuantas audiencias y tribunales hay casi en toda
España; y que, a lo último, se había venido a recoger a aquel su castillo,
donde vivía con su hacienda y con las ajenas, recogiendo en él a todos los
caballeros andantes, de cualquiera calidad y condición que fuesen, sólo por
la mucha afición que les tenía y porque partiesen con él de sus haberes, en
pago de su buen deseo.

Díjole también que en aquel su castillo no había capilla alguna donde poder
velar las armas, porque estaba derribada para hacerla de nuevo; pero que,
en caso de necesidad, él sabía que se podían velar dondequiera, y que
aquella noche las podría velar en un patio del castillo; que a la mañana,
siendo Dios servido, se harían las debidas ceremonias, de manera que él
quedase armado caballero, y tan caballero que no pudiese ser más en el
mundo.

Preguntóle si traía dineros; respondió don Quijote que no traía blanca,
porque él nunca había leído en las historias de los caballeros andantes que
ninguno los hubiese traído. A esto dijo el ventero que se engañaba; que,
puesto caso que en las historias no se escribía, por haberles parecido a
los autores dellas que no era menester escrebir una cosa tan clara y tan
necesaria de traerse como eran dineros y camisas limpias, no por eso se
había de creer que no los trujeron; y así, tuviese por cierto y averiguado
que todos los caballeros andantes, de que tantos libros están llenos y
atestados, llevaban bien herradas las bolsas, por lo que pudiese
sucederles; y que asimismo llevaban camisas y una arqueta pequeña llena de
ungüentos para curar las heridas que recebían, porque no todas veces en los
campos y desiertos donde se combatían y salían heridos había quien los
curase, si ya no era que tenían algún sabio encantador por amigo, que luego
los socorría, trayendo por el aire, en alguna nube, alguna doncella o enano
con alguna redoma de agua de tal virtud que, en gustando alguna gota della,
luego al punto quedaban sanos de sus llagas y heridas, como si mal alguno
hubiesen tenido. Mas que, en tanto que esto no hubiese, tuvieron los
pasados caballeros por cosa acertada que sus escuderos fuesen proveídos de
dineros y de otras cosas necesarias, como eran hilas y ungüentos para
curarse; y, cuando sucedía que los tales caballeros no tenían escuderos,
que eran pocas y raras veces, ellos mesmos lo llevaban todo en unas
alforjas muy sutiles, que casi no se parecían, a las ancas del caballo,
como que era otra cosa de más importancia; porque, no siendo por ocasión
semejante, esto de llevar alforjas no fue muy admitido entre los caballeros
andantes; y por esto le daba por consejo, pues aún se lo podía mandar como
a su ahijado, que tan presto lo había de ser, que no caminase de allí
adelante sin dineros y sin las prevenciones referidas, y que vería cuán
bien se hallaba con ellas cuando menos se pensase.

Prometióle don Quijote de hacer lo que se le aconsejaba con toda
puntualidad; y así, se dio luego orden como velase las armas en un corral
grande que a un lado de la venta estaba; y, recogiéndolas don Quijote
todas, las puso sobre una pila que junto a un pozo estaba, y, embrazando su
adarga, asió de su lanza y con gentil continente se comenzó a pasear
delante de la pila; y cuando comenzó el paseo comenzaba a cerrar la noche.

Contó el ventero a todos cuantos estaban en la venta la locura de su
huésped, la vela de las armas y la armazón de caballería que esperaba.
Admiráronse de tan estraño género de locura y fuéronselo a mirar desde
lejos, y vieron que, con sosegado ademán, unas veces se paseaba; otras,
arrimado a su lanza, ponía los ojos en las armas, sin quitarlos por un buen
espacio dellas. Acabó de cerrar la noche, pero con tanta claridad de la
luna, que podía competir con el que se la prestaba, de manera que cuanto el
novel caballero hacía era bien visto de todos. Antojósele en esto a uno de
los arrieros que estaban en la venta ir a dar agua a su recua, y fue
menester quitar las armas de don Quijote, que estaban sobre la pila; el
cual, viéndole llegar, en voz alta le dijo:

— ¡Oh tú, quienquiera que seas, atrevido caballero, que llegas a tocar las
armas del más valeroso andante que jamás se ciñó espada!, mira lo que haces
y no las toques, si no quieres dejar la vida en pago de tu atrevimiento.

No se curó el arriero destas razones (y fuera mejor que se curara, porque
fuera curarse en salud); antes, trabando de las correas, las arrojó gran
trecho de sí. Lo cual visto por don Quijote, alzó los ojos al cielo, y,
puesto el pensamiento —a lo que pareció— en su señora Dulcinea, dijo:

— Acorredme, señora mía, en esta primera afrenta que a este vuestro
avasallado pecho se le ofrece; no me desfallezca en este primero trance
vuestro favor y amparo.

Y, diciendo estas y otras semejantes razones, soltando la adarga, alzó la
lanza a dos manos y dio con ella tan gran golpe al arriero en la cabeza,
que le derribó en el suelo, tan maltrecho que, si segundara con otro, no
tuviera necesidad de maestro que le curara. Hecho esto, recogió sus armas y
tornó a pasearse con el mismo reposo que primero. Desde allí a poco, sin
saberse lo que había pasado (porque aún estaba aturdido el arriero), llegó
otro con la mesma intención de dar agua a sus mulos; y, llegando a quitar
las armas para desembarazar la pila, sin hablar don Quijote palabra y sin
pedir favor a nadie, soltó otra vez la adarga y alzó otra vez la lanza, y,
sin hacerla pedazos, hizo más de tres la cabeza del segundo arriero, porque
se la abrió por cuatro. Al ruido acudió toda la gente de la venta, y entre
ellos el ventero. Viendo esto don Quijote, embrazó su adarga, y, puesta
mano a su espada, dijo:

— ¡Oh señora de la fermosura, esfuerzo y vigor del debilitado corazón mío!
Ahora es tiempo que vuelvas los ojos de tu grandeza a este tu cautivo
caballero, que tamaña aventura está atendiendo.

Con esto cobró, a su parecer, tanto ánimo, que si le acometieran todos los
arrieros del mundo, no volviera el pie atrás. Los compañeros de los
heridos, que tales los vieron, comenzaron desde lejos a llover piedras
sobre don Quijote, el cual, lo mejor que podía, se reparaba con su adarga,
y no se osaba apartar de la pila por no desamparar las armas. El ventero
daba voces que le dejasen, porque ya les había dicho como era loco, y que
por loco se libraría, aunque los matase a todos. También don Quijote las
daba, mayores, llamándolos de alevosos y traidores, y que el señor del
castillo era un follón y mal nacido caballero, pues de tal manera consentía
que se tratasen los andantes caballeros; y que si él hubiera recebido la
orden de caballería, que él le diera a entender su alevosía:

— Pero de vosotros, soez y baja canalla, no hago caso alguno: tirad, llegad,
venid y ofendedme en cuanto pudiéredes, que vosotros veréis el pago que
lleváis de vuestra sandez y demasía.

Decía esto con tanto brío y denuedo, que infundió un terrible temor en los
que le acometían; y, así por esto como por las persuasiones del ventero, le
dejaron de tirar, y él dejó retirar a los heridos y tornó a la vela de sus
armas con la misma quietud y sosiego que primero.

No le parecieron bien al ventero las burlas de su huésped, y determinó
abreviar y darle la negra orden de caballería luego, antes que otra
desgracia sucediese. Y así, llegándose a él, se desculpó de la insolencia
que aquella gente baja con él había usado, sin que él supiese cosa alguna;
pero que bien castigados quedaban de su atrevimiento. Díjole como ya le
había dicho que en aquel castillo no había capilla, y para lo que restaba
de hacer tampoco era necesaria; que todo el toque de quedar armado
caballero consistía en la pescozada y en el espaldarazo, según él tenía
noticia del ceremonial de la orden, y que aquello en mitad de un campo se
podía hacer, y que ya había cumplido con lo que tocaba al velar de las
armas, que con solas dos horas de vela se cumplía, cuanto más, que él había
estado más de cuatro. Todo se lo creyó don Quijote, y dijo que él estaba
allí pronto para obedecerle, y que concluyese con la mayor brevedad que
pudiese; porque si fuese otra vez acometido y se viese armado caballero, no
pensaba dejar persona viva en el castillo, eceto aquellas que él le
mandase, a quien por su respeto dejaría.

Advertido y medroso desto el castellano, trujo luego un libro donde
asentaba la paja y cebada que daba a los arrieros, y con un cabo de vela
que le traía un muchacho, y con las dos ya dichas doncellas, se vino adonde
don Quijote estaba, al cual mandó hincar de rodillas; y, leyendo en su
manual, como que decía alguna devota oración, en mitad de la leyenda alzó
la mano y diole sobre el cuello un buen golpe, y tras él, con su mesma
espada, un gentil espaldazaro, siempre murmurando entre dientes, como que
rezaba. Hecho esto, mandó a una de aquellas damas que le ciñese la espada,
la cual lo hizo con mucha desenvoltura y discreción, porque no fue menester
poca para no reventar de risa a cada punto de las ceremonias; pero las
proezas que ya habían visto del novel caballero les tenía la risa a raya.
Al ceñirle la espada, dijo la buena señora:

— Dios haga a vuestra merced muy venturoso caballero y le dé ventura en
lides.

Don Quijote le preguntó cómo se llamaba, porque él supiese de allí adelante
a quién quedaba obligado por la merced recebida; porque pensaba darle
alguna parte de la honra que alcanzase por el valor de su brazo. Ella
respondió con mucha humildad que se llamaba la Tolosa, y que era hija de un
remendón natural de Toledo que vivía a las tendillas de Sancho Bienaya, y
que dondequiera que ella estuviese le serviría y le tendría por señor. Don
Quijote le replicó que, por su amor, le hiciese merced que de allí adelante
se pusiese don y se llamase doña Tolosa. Ella se lo prometió, y la otra le
calzó la espuela, con la cual le pasó casi el mismo coloquio que con la de
la espada: preguntóle su nombre, y dijo que se llamaba la Molinera, y que
era hija de un honrado molinero de Antequera; a la cual también rogó don
Quijote que se pusiese don y se llamase doña Molinera, ofreciéndole nuevos
servicios y mercedes.

Hechas, pues, de galope y aprisa las hasta allí nunca vistas ceremonias, no
vio la hora don Quijote de verse a caballo y salir buscando las aventuras;
y, ensillando luego a Rocinante, subió en él, y, abrazando a su huésped, le
dijo cosas tan estrañas, agradeciéndole la merced de haberle armado
caballero, que no es posible acertar a referirlas. El ventero, por verle ya
fuera de la venta, con no menos retóricas, aunque con más breves palabras,
respondió a las suyas, y, sin pedirle la costa de la posada, le dejó ir a
la buen hora.




Capítulo IV. De lo que le sucedió a nuestro caballero cuando salió de la
venta

La del alba sería cuando don Quijote salió de la venta, tan contento, tan
gallardo, tan alborozado por verse ya armado caballero, que el gozo le
reventaba por las cinchas del caballo. Mas, viniéndole a la memoria los
consejos de su huésped cerca de las prevenciones tan necesarias que había
de llevar consigo, especial la de los dineros y camisas, determinó volver a
su casa y acomodarse de todo, y de un escudero, haciendo cuenta de recebir
a un labrador vecino suyo, que era pobre y con hijos, pero muy a propósito
para el oficio escuderil de la caballería. Con este pensamiento guió a
Rocinante hacia su aldea, el cual, casi conociendo la querencia, con tanta
gana comenzó a caminar, que parecía que no ponía los pies en el suelo.

No había andado mucho, cuando le pareció que a su diestra mano, de la
espesura de un bosque que allí estaba, salían unas voces delicadas, como de
persona que se quejaba; y apenas las hubo oído, cuando dijo:

— Gracias doy al cielo por la merced que me hace, pues tan presto me pone
ocasiones delante donde yo pueda cumplir con lo que debo a mi profesión, y
donde pueda coger el fruto de mis buenos deseos. Estas voces, sin duda, son
de algún menesteroso o menesterosa, que ha menester mi favor y ayuda.

Y, volviendo las riendas, encaminó a Rocinante hacia donde le pareció que
las voces salían. Y, a pocos pasos que entró por el bosque, vio atada una
yegua a una encina, y atado en otra a un muchacho, desnudo de medio cuerpo
arriba, hasta de edad de quince años, que era el que las voces daba; y no
sin causa, porque le estaba dando con una pretina muchos azotes un labrador
de buen talle, y cada azote le acompañaba con una reprehensión y consejo.
Porque decía:

— La lengua queda y los ojos listos.

Y el muchacho respondía:

— No lo haré otra vez, señor mío; por la pasión de Dios, que no lo haré otra
vez; y yo prometo de tener de aquí adelante más cuidado con el hato.

Y, viendo don Quijote lo que pasaba, con voz airada dijo:

— Descortés caballero, mal parece tomaros con quien defender no se puede;
subid sobre vuestro caballo y tomad vuestra lanza —que también tenía una
lanza arrimada a la encima adonde estaba arrendada la yegua—, que yo os
haré conocer ser de cobardes lo que estáis haciendo.

El labrador, que vio sobre sí aquella figura llena de armas blandiendo la
lanza sobre su rostro, túvose por muerto, y con buenas palabras respondió:

— Señor caballero, este muchacho que estoy castigando es un mi criado, que
me sirve de guardar una manada de ovejas que tengo en estos contornos, el
cual es tan descuidado, que cada día me falta una; y, porque castigo su
descuido, o bellaquería, dice que lo hago de miserable, por no pagalle la
soldada que le debo, y en Dios y en mi ánima que miente.

— ¿"Miente", delante de mí, ruin villano? —dijo don Quijote—. Por el sol que
nos alumbra, que estoy por pasaros de parte a parte con esta lanza. Pagadle
luego sin más réplica; si no, por el Dios que nos rige, que os concluya y
aniquile en este punto. Desatadlo luego.

El labrador bajó la cabeza y, sin responder palabra, desató a su criado, al
cual preguntó don Quijote que cuánto le debía su amo. Él dijo que nueve
meses, a siete reales cada mes. Hizo la cuenta don Quijote y halló que
montaban setenta y tres reales, y díjole al labrador que al momento los
desembolsase, si no quería morir por ello. Respondió el medroso villano que
para el paso en que estaba y juramento que había hecho —y aún no había
jurado nada—, que no eran tantos, porque se le habían de descontar y
recebir en cuenta tres pares de zapatos que le había dado y un real de dos
sangrías que le habían hecho estando enfermo.

— Bien está todo eso —replicó don Quijote—, pero quédense los zapatos y las
sangrías por los azotes que sin culpa le habéis dado; que si él rompió el
cuero de los zapatos que vos pagastes, vos le habéis rompido el de su
cuerpo; y si le sacó el barbero sangre estando enfermo, vos en sanidad se
la habéis sacado; ansí que, por esta parte, no os debe nada.

— El daño está, señor caballero, en que no tengo aquí dineros: véngase
Andrés conmigo a mi casa, que yo se los pagaré un real sobre otro.

— ¿Irme yo con él? —dijo el muchacho—. Mas, ¡mal año! No, señor, ni por
pienso; porque, en viéndose solo, me desuelle como a un San Bartolomé.

— No hará tal —replicó don Quijote—: basta que yo se lo mande para que me
tenga respeto; y con que él me lo jure por la ley de caballería que ha
recebido, le dejaré ir libre y aseguraré la paga.

— Mire vuestra merced, señor, lo que dice —dijo el muchacho—, que este mi
amo no es caballero ni ha recebido orden de caballería alguna; que es Juan
Haldudo el rico, el vecino del Quintanar.

— Importa eso poco —respondió don Quijote—, que Haldudos puede haber
caballeros; cuanto más, que cada uno es hijo de sus obras.

— Así es verdad —dijo Andrés—; pero este mi amo, ¿de qué obras es hijo, pues
me niega mi soldada y mi sudor y trabajo?

— No niego, hermano Andrés —respondió el labrador—; y hacedme placer de
veniros conmigo, que yo juro por todas las órdenes que de caballerías hay
en el mundo de pagaros, como tengo dicho, un real sobre otro, y aun
sahumados.

— Del sahumerio os hago gracia —dijo don Quijote—; dádselos en reales, que
con eso me contento; y mirad que lo cumpláis como lo habéis jurado; si no,
por el mismo juramento os juro de volver a buscaros y a castigaros, y que
os tengo de hallar, aunque os escondáis más que una lagartija. Y si queréis
saber quién os manda esto, para quedar con más veras obligado a cumplirlo,
sabed que yo soy el valeroso don Quijote de la Mancha, el desfacedor de
agravios y sinrazones; y a Dios quedad, y no se os parta de las mientes lo
prometido y jurado, so pena de la pena pronunciada.

Y, en diciendo esto, picó a su Rocinante, y en breve espacio se apartó
dellos. Siguióle el labrador con los ojos, y, cuando vio que había
traspuesto del bosque y que ya no parecía, volvióse a su criado Andrés y
díjole:

— Venid acá, hijo mío, que os quiero pagar lo que os debo, como aquel
deshacedor de agravios me dejó mandado.

— Eso juro yo —dijo Andrés—; y ¡cómo que andará vuestra merced acertado en
cumplir el mandamiento de aquel buen caballero, que mil años viva; que,
según es de valeroso y de buen juez, vive Roque, que si no me paga, que
vuelva y ejecute lo que dijo!

— También lo juro yo —dijo el labrador—; pero, por lo mucho que os quiero,
quiero acrecentar la deuda por acrecentar la paga.

Y, asiéndole del brazo, le tornó a atar a la encina, donde le dio tantos
azotes, que le dejó por muerto.

— Llamad, señor Andrés, ahora —decía el labrador— al desfacedor de agravios,
veréis cómo no desface aquéste; aunque creo que no está acabado de hacer,
porque me viene gana de desollaros vivo, como vos temíades.

Pero, al fin, le desató y le dio licencia que fuese a buscar su juez, para
que ejecutase la pronunciada sentencia. Andrés se partió algo mohíno,
jurando de ir a buscar al valeroso don Quijote de la Mancha y contalle
punto por punto lo que había pasado, y que se lo había de pagar con las
setenas. Pero, con todo esto, él se partió llorando y su amo se quedó
riendo.

Y desta manera deshizo el agravio el valeroso don Quijote; el cual,
contentísimo de lo sucedido, pareciéndole que había dado felicísimo y alto
principio a sus caballerías, con gran satisfación de sí mismo iba caminando
hacia su aldea, diciendo a media voz:

— Bien te puedes llamar dichosa sobre cuantas hoy viven en la tierra, ¡oh
sobre las bellas bella Dulcinea del Toboso!, pues te cupo en suerte tener
sujeto y rendido a toda tu voluntad e talante a un tan valiente y tan
nombrado caballero como lo es y será don Quijote de la Mancha, el cual,
como todo el mundo sabe, ayer rescibió la orden de caballería, y hoy ha
desfecho el mayor tuerto y agravio que formó la sinrazón y cometió la
crueldad: hoy quitó el látigo de la mano a aquel despiadado enemigo que tan
sin ocasión vapulaba a aquel delicado infante.

En esto, llegó a un camino que en cuatro se dividía, y luego se le vino a
la imaginación las encrucejadas donde los caballeros andantes se ponían a
pensar cuál camino de aquéllos tomarían, y, por imitarlos, estuvo un rato
quedo; y, al cabo de haberlo muy bien pensado, soltó la rienda a Rocinante,
dejando a la voluntad del rocín la suya, el cual siguió su primer intento,
que fue el irse camino de su caballeriza.

Y, habiendo andado como dos millas, descubrió don Quijote un grande tropel
de gente, que, como después se supo, eran unos mercaderes toledanos que
iban a comprar seda a Murcia. Eran seis, y venían con sus quitasoles, con
otros cuatro criados a caballo y tres mozos de mulas a pie. Apenas los
divisó don Quijote, cuando se imaginó ser cosa de nueva aventura; y, por
imitar en todo cuanto a él le parecía posible los pasos que había leído en
sus libros, le pareció venir allí de molde uno que pensaba hacer. Y así,
con gentil continente y denuedo, se afirmó bien en los estribos, apretó la
lanza, llegó la adarga al pecho, y, puesto en la mitad del camino, estuvo
esperando que aquellos caballeros andantes llegasen, que ya él por tales
los tenía y juzgaba; y, cuando llegaron a trecho que se pudieron ver y oír,
levantó don Quijote la voz, y con ademán arrogante dijo:

— Todo el mundo se tenga, si todo el mundo no confiesa que no hay en el
mundo todo doncella más hermosa que la emperatriz de la Mancha, la sin par
Dulcinea del Toboso.

Paráronse los mercaderes al son destas razones, y a ver la estraña figura
del que las decía; y, por la figura y por las razones, luego echaron de ver
la locura de su dueño; mas quisieron ver despacio en qué paraba aquella
confesión que se les pedía, y uno dellos, que era un poco burlón y muy
mucho discreto, le dijo:

— Señor caballero, nosotros no conocemos quién sea esa buena señora que
decís; mostrádnosla: que si ella fuere de tanta hermosura como significáis,
de buena gana y sin apremio alguno confesaremos la verdad que por parte
vuestra nos es pedida.

— Si os la mostrara —replicó don Quijote—, ¿qué hiciérades vosotros en
confesar una verdad tan notoria? La importancia está en que sin verla lo
habéis de creer, confesar, afirmar, jurar y defender; donde no, conmigo
sois en batalla, gente descomunal y soberbia. Que, ahora vengáis uno a uno,
como pide la orden de caballería, ora todos juntos, como es costumbre y
mala usanza de los de vuestra ralea, aquí os aguardo y espero, confiado en
la razón que de mi parte tengo.

— Señor caballero —replicó el mercader—, suplico a vuestra merced, en nombre
de todos estos príncipes que aquí estamos, que, porque no encarguemos
nuestras conciencias confesando una cosa por nosotros jamás vista ni oída,
y más siendo tan en perjuicio de las emperatrices y reinas del Alcarria y
Estremadura, que vuestra merced sea servido de mostrarnos algún retrato de
esa señora, aunque sea tamaño como un grano de trigo; que por el hilo se
sacará el ovillo, y quedaremos con esto satisfechos y seguros, y vuestra
merced quedará contento y pagado; y aun creo que estamos ya tan de su parte
que, aunque su retrato nos muestre que es tuerta de un ojo y que del otro
le mana bermellón y piedra azufre, con todo eso, por complacer a vuestra
merced, diremos en su favor todo lo que quisiere.

— No le mana, canalla infame —respondió don Quijote, encendido en cólera—;
no le mana, digo, eso que decís, sino ámbar y algalia entre algodones; y no
es tuerta ni corcovada, sino más derecha que un huso de Guadarrama. Pero
vosotros pagaréis la grande blasfemia que habéis dicho contra tamaña beldad
como es la de mi señora.

Y, en diciendo esto, arremetió con la lanza baja contra el que lo había
dicho, con tanta furia y enojo que, si la buena suerte no hiciera que en la
mitad del camino tropezara y cayera Rocinante, lo pasara mal el atrevido
mercader. Cayó Rocinante, y fue rodando su amo una buena pieza por el
campo; y, queriéndose levantar, jamás pudo: tal embarazo le causaban la
lanza, adarga, espuelas y celada, con el peso de las antiguas armas. Y,
entretanto que pugnaba por levantarse y no podía, estaba diciendo:

— ¡Non fuyáis, gente cobarde; gente cautiva, atended!; que no por culpa mía,
sino de mi caballo, estoy aquí tendido.

Un mozo de mulas de los que allí venían, que no debía de ser muy bien
intencionado, oyendo decir al pobre caído tantas arrogancias, no lo pudo
sufrir sin darle la respuesta en las costillas. Y, llegándose a él, tomó la
lanza, y, después de haberla hecho pedazos, con uno dellos comenzó a dar a
nuestro don Quijote tantos palos que, a despecho y pesar de sus armas, le
molió como cibera. Dábanle voces sus amos que no le diese tanto y que le
dejase, pero estaba ya el mozo picado y no quiso dejar el juego hasta
envidar todo el resto de su cólera; y, acudiendo por los demás trozos de la
lanza, los acabó de deshacer sobre el miserable caído, que, con toda
aquella tempestad de palos que sobre él vía, no cerraba la boca, amenazando
al cielo y a la tierra, y a los malandrines, que tal le parecían.

Cansóse el mozo, y los mercaderes siguieron su camino, llevando qué contar
en todo él del pobre apaleado. El cual, después que se vio solo, tornó a
probar si podía levantarse; pero si no lo pudo hacer cuando sano y bueno,
¿cómo lo haría molido y casi deshecho? Y aún se tenía por dichoso,
pareciéndole que aquélla era propia desgracia de caballeros andantes, y
toda la atribuía a la falta de su caballo, y no era posible levantarse,
según tenía brumado todo el cuerpo.




Capítulo V. Donde se prosigue la narración de la desgracia de nuestro
caballero

Viendo, pues, que, en efeto, no podía menearse, acordó de acogerse a su
ordinario remedio, que era pensar en algún paso de sus libros; y trújole su
locura a la memoria aquel de Valdovinos y del marqués de Mantua, cuando
Carloto le dejó herido en la montiña, historia sabida de los niños, no
ignorada de los mozos, celebrada y aun creída de los viejos; y, con todo
esto, no más verdadera que los milagros de Mahoma. Ésta, pues, le pareció a
él que le venía de molde para el paso en que se hallaba; y así, con
muestras de grande sentimiento, se comenzó a volcar por la tierra y a decir
con debilitado aliento lo mesmo que dicen decía el herido caballero del
bosque:

-¿Donde estás, señora mía,
que no te duele mi mal?
O no lo sabes, señora,
o eres falsa y desleal.

Y, desta manera, fue prosiguiendo el romance hasta aquellos versos que
dicen:

-¡Oh noble marqués de Mantua,
mi tío y señor carnal!

Y quiso la suerte que, cuando llegó a este verso, acertó a pasar por allí
un labrador de su mesmo lugar y vecino suyo, que venía de llevar una carga
de trigo al molino; el cual, viendo aquel hombre allí tendido, se llegó a
él y le preguntó que quién era y qué mal sentía que tan tristemente se
quejaba. Don Quijote creyó, sin duda, que aquél era el marqués de Mantua,
su tío; y así, no le respondió otra cosa si no fue proseguir en su romance,
donde le daba cuenta de su desgracia y de los amores del hijo del Emperante
con su esposa, todo de la mesma manera que el romance lo canta.

El labrador estaba admirado oyendo aquellos disparates; y, quitándole la
visera, que ya estaba hecha pedazos de los palos, le limpió el rostro, que
le tenía cubierto de polvo; y apenas le hubo limpiado, cuando le conoció y
le dijo:

— Señor Quijana —que así se debía de llamar cuando él tenía juicio y no
había pasado de hidalgo sosegado a caballero andante—, ¿quién ha puesto a
vuestra merced desta suerte?

Pero él seguía con su romance a cuanto le preguntaba. Viendo esto el buen
hombre, lo mejor que pudo le quitó el peto y espaldar, para ver si tenía
alguna herida; pero no vio sangre ni señal alguna. Procuró levantarle del
suelo, y no con poco trabajo le subió sobre su jumento, por parecer
caballería más sosegada. Recogió las armas, hasta las astillas de la lanza,
y liólas sobre Rocinante, al cual tomó de la rienda, y del cabestro al
asno, y se encaminó hacia su pueblo, bien pensativo de oír los disparates
que don Quijote decía; y no menos iba don Quijote, que, de puro molido y
quebrantado, no se podía tener sobre el borrico, y de cuando en cuando daba
unos suspiros que los ponía en el cielo; de modo que de nuevo obligó a que
el labrador le preguntase le dijese qué mal sentía; y no parece sino que el
diablo le traía a la memoria los cuentos acomodados a sus sucesos, porque,
en aquel punto, olvidándose de Valdovinos, se acordó del moro Abindarráez,
cuando el alcaide de Antequera, Rodrigo de Narváez, le prendió y llevó
cautivo a su alcaidía. De suerte que, cuando el labrador le volvió a
preguntar que cómo estaba y qué sentía, le respondió las mesmas palabras y
razones que el cautivo Abencerraje respondía a Rodrigo de Narváez, del
mesmo modo que él había leído la historia en La Diana, de Jorge de
Montemayor, donde se escribe; aprovechándose della tan a propósito, que el
labrador se iba dando al diablo de oír tanta máquina de necedades; por
donde conoció que su vecino estaba loco, y dábale priesa a llegar al
pueblo, por escusar el enfado que don Quijote le causaba con su larga
arenga. Al cabo de lo cual, dijo:

— Sepa vuestra merced, señor don Rodrigo de Narváez, que esta hermosa Jarifa
que he dicho es ahora la linda Dulcinea del Toboso, por quien yo he hecho,
hago y haré los más famosos hechos de caballerías que se han visto, vean ni
verán en el mundo.

A esto respondió el labrador:

— Mire vuestra merced, señor, pecador de mí, que yo no soy don Rodrigo de
Narváez, ni el marqués de Mantua, sino Pedro Alonso, su vecino; ni vuestra
merced es Valdovinos, ni Abindarráez, sino el honrado hidalgo del señor
Quijana.

— Yo sé quién soy —respondió don Quijote—; y sé que puedo ser no sólo los
que he dicho, sino todos los Doce Pares de Francia, y aun todos los Nueve
de la Fama, pues a todas las hazañas que ellos todos juntos y cada uno por
sí hicieron, se aventajarán las mías.

En estas pláticas y en otras semejantes, llegaron al lugar a la hora que
anochecía, pero el labrador aguardó a que fuese algo más noche, porque no
viesen al molido hidalgo tan mal caballero. Llegada, pues, la hora que le
pareció, entró en el pueblo, y en la casa de don Quijote, la cual halló
toda alborotada; y estaban en ella el cura y el barbero del lugar, que eran
grandes amigos de don Quijote, que estaba diciéndoles su ama a voces:

— ¿Qué le parece a vuestra merced, señor licenciado Pero Pérez —que así se
llamaba el cura—, de la desgracia de mi señor? Tres días ha que no parecen
él, ni el rocín, ni la adarga, ni la lanza ni las armas. ¡Desventurada de
mí!, que me doy a entender, y así es ello la verdad como nací para morir,
que estos malditos libros de caballerías que él tiene y suele leer tan de
ordinario le han vuelto el juicio; que ahora me acuerdo haberle oído decir
muchas veces, hablando entre sí, que quería hacerse caballero andante e
irse a buscar las aventuras por esos mundos. Encomendados sean a Satanás y
a Barrabás tales libros, que así han echado a perder el más delicado
entendimiento que había en toda la Mancha.

La sobrina decía lo mesmo, y aun decía más:

— Sepa, señor maese Nicolás —que éste era el nombre del barbero—, que muchas
veces le aconteció a mi señor tío estarse leyendo en estos desalmados
libros de desventuras dos días con sus noches, al cabo de los cuales,
arrojaba el libro de las manos, y ponía mano a la espada y andaba a
cuchilladas con las paredes; y cuando estaba muy cansado, decía que había
muerto a cuatro gigantes como cuatro torres, y el sudor que sudaba del
cansancio decía que era sangre de las feridas que había recebido en la
batalla; y bebíase luego un gran jarro de agua fría, y quedaba sano y
sosegado, diciendo que aquella agua era una preciosísima bebida que le
había traído el sabio Esquife, un grande encantador y amigo suyo. Mas yo me
tengo la culpa de todo, que no avisé a vuestras mercedes de los disparates
de mi señor tío, para que lo remediaran antes de llegar a lo que ha
llegado, y quemaran todos estos descomulgados libros, que tiene muchos, que
bien merecen ser abrasados, como si fuesen de herejes.

— Esto digo yo también —dijo el cura—, y a fee que no se pase el día de
mañana sin que dellos no se haga acto público y sean condenados al fuego,
porque no den ocasión a quien los leyere de hacer lo que mi buen amigo debe
de haber hecho.

Todo esto estaban oyendo el labrador y don Quijote, con que acabó de
entender el labrador la enfermedad de su vecino; y así, comenzó a decir a
voces:

— Abran vuestras mercedes al señor Valdovinos y al señor marqués de Mantua,
que viene malferido, y al señor moro Abindarráez, que trae cautivo el
valeroso Rodrigo de Narváez, alcaide de Antequera.

A estas voces salieron todos, y, como conocieron los unos a su amigo, las
otras a su amo y tío, que aún no se había apeado del jumento, porque no
podía, corrieron a abrazarle. Él dijo:

— Ténganse todos, que vengo malferido por la culpa de mi caballo. Llévenme a
mi lecho y llámese, si fuere posible, a la sabia Urganda, que cure y cate
de mis feridas.

— ¡Mirá, en hora maza —dijo a este punto el ama—, si me decía a mí bien mi
corazón del pie que cojeaba mi señor! Suba vuestra merced en buen hora,
que, sin que venga esa Hurgada, le sabremos aquí curar. ¡Malditos, digo,
sean otra vez y otras ciento estos libros de caballerías, que tal han
parado a vuestra merced!

Lleváronle luego a la cama, y, catándole las feridas, no le hallaron
ninguna; y él dijo que todo era molimiento, por haber dado una gran caída
con Rocinante, su caballo, combatiéndose con diez jayanes, los más
desaforados y atrevidos que se pudieran fallar en gran parte de la tierra.

— ¡Ta, ta! —dijo el cura—. ¿Jayanes hay en la danza? Para mi santiguada, que
yo los queme mañana antes que llegue la noche.

Hiciéronle a don Quijote mil preguntas, y a ninguna quiso responder otra
cosa sino que le diesen de comer y le dejasen dormir, que era lo que más le
importaba. Hízose así, y el cura se informó muy a la larga del labrador del
modo que había hallado a don Quijote. Él se lo contó todo, con los
disparates que al hallarle y al traerle había dicho; que fue poner más
deseo en el licenciado de hacer lo que otro día hizo, que fue llamar a su
amigo el barbero maese Nicolás, con el cual se vino a casa de don Quijote,




Capítulo VI. Del donoso y grande escrutinio que el cura y el barbero
hicieron en la librería de nuestro ingenioso hidalgo

el cual aún todavía dormía. Pidió las llaves, a la sobrina, del aposento
donde estaban los libros, autores del daño, y ella se las dio de muy buena
gana. Entraron dentro todos, y la ama con ellos, y hallaron más de cien
cuerpos de libros grandes, muy bien encuadernados, y otros pequeños; y, así
como el ama los vio, volvióse a salir del aposento con gran priesa, y tornó
luego con una escudilla de agua bendita y un hisopo, y dijo:

— Tome vuestra merced, señor licenciado: rocíe este aposento, no esté aquí
algún encantador de los muchos que tienen estos libros, y nos encanten, en
pena de las que les queremos dar echándolos del mundo.

Causó risa al licenciado la simplicidad del ama, y mandó al barbero que le
fuese dando de aquellos libros uno a uno, para ver de qué trataban, pues
podía ser hallar algunos que no mereciesen castigo de fuego.

— No —dijo la sobrina—, no hay para qué perdonar a ninguno, porque todos han
sido los dañadores; mejor será arrojarlos por las ventanas al patio, y
hacer un rimero dellos y pegarles fuego; y si no, llevarlos al corral, y
allí se hará la hoguera, y no ofenderá el humo.

Lo mismo dijo el ama: tal era la gana que las dos tenían de la muerte de
aquellos inocentes; mas el cura no vino en ello sin primero leer siquiera
los títulos. Y el primero que maese Nicolás le dio en las manos fue Los
cuatro de Amadís de Gaula, y dijo el cura:

— Parece cosa de misterio ésta; porque, según he oído decir, este libro fue
el primero de caballerías que se imprimió en España, y todos los demás han
tomado principio y origen déste; y así, me parece que, como a dogmatizador
de una secta tan mala, le debemos, sin escusa alguna, condenar al fuego.

— No, señor —dijo el barbero—, que también he oído decir que es el mejor de
todos los libros que de este género se han compuesto; y así, como a único
en su arte, se debe perdonar.

— Así es verdad —dijo el cura—, y por esa razón se le otorga la vida por
ahora. Veamos esotro que está junto a él.

— Es —dijo el barbero— las Sergas de Esplandián, hijo legítimo de Amadís de
Gaula.

— Pues, en verdad —dijo el cura— que no le ha de valer al hijo la bondad del
padre. Tomad, señora ama: abrid esa ventana y echadle al corral, y dé
principio al montón de la hoguera que se ha de hacer.

Hízolo así el ama con mucho contento, y el bueno de Esplandián fue volando
al corral, esperando con toda paciencia el fuego que le amenazaba.

— Adelante —dijo el cura.

— Este que viene —dijo el barbero— es Amadís de Grecia; y aun todos los
deste lado, a lo que creo, son del mesmo linaje de Amadís.

— Pues vayan todos al corral —dijo el cura—; que, a trueco de quemar a la
reina Pintiquiniestra, y al pastor Darinel, y a sus églogas, y a las
endiabladas y revueltas razones de su autor, quemaré con ellos al padre que
me engendró, si anduviera en figura de caballero andante.

— De ese parecer soy yo —dijo el barbero.

— Y aun yo —añadió la sobrina.

— Pues así es —dijo el ama—, vengan, y al corral con ellos.

Diéronselos, que eran muchos, y ella ahorró la escalera y dio con ellos por
la ventana abajo.

— ¿Quién es ese tonel? —dijo el cura.

— Éste es —respondió el barbero— Don Olivante de Laura.

— El autor de ese libro —dijo el cura— fue el mesmo que compuso a Jardín de
flores; y en verdad que no sepa determinar cuál de los dos libros es más
verdadero, o, por decir mejor, menos mentiroso; sólo sé decir que éste irá
al corral por disparatado y arrogante.

— Éste que se sigue es Florimorte de Hircania —dijo el barbero.

— ¿Ahí está el señor Florimorte? —replicó el cura—. Pues a fe que ha de
parar presto en el corral, a pesar de su estraño nacimiento y sonadas
aventuras; que no da lugar a otra cosa la dureza y sequedad de su estilo.
Al corral con él y con esotro, señora ama.

— Que me place, señor mío —respondía ella; y con mucha alegría ejecutaba lo
que le era mandado.

— Éste es El Caballero Platir —dijo el barbero.

— Antiguo libro es éste —dijo el cura—, y no hallo en él cosa que merezca
venia. Acompañe a los demás sin réplica.

Y así fue hecho. Abrióse otro libro y vieron que tenía por título El
Caballero de la Cruz.

— Por nombre tan santo como este libro tiene, se podía perdonar su
ignorancia; mas también se suele decir: "tras la cruz está el diablo"; vaya
al fuego.

Tomando el barbero otro libro, dijo:

— Éste es Espejo de caballerías.

— Ya conozco a su merced —dijo el cura—. Ahí anda el señor Reinaldos de
Montalbán con sus amigos y compañeros, más ladrones que Caco, y los doce
Pares, con el verdadero historiador Turpín; y en verdad que estoy por
condenarlos no más que a destierro perpetuo, siquiera porque tienen parte
de la invención del famoso Mateo Boyardo, de donde también tejió su tela el
cristiano poeta Ludovico Ariosto; al cual, si aquí le hallo, y que habla en
otra lengua que la suya, no le guardaré respeto alguno; pero si habla en su
idioma, le pondré sobre mi cabeza.

— Pues yo le tengo en italiano —dijo el barbero—, mas no le entiendo.

— Ni aun fuera bien que vos le entendiérades —respondió el cura—, y aquí le
perdonáramos al señor capitán que no le hubiera traído a España y hecho
castellano; que le quitó mucho de su natural valor, y lo mesmo harán todos
aquellos que los libros de verso quisieren volver en otra lengua: que, por
mucho cuidado que pongan y habilidad que muestren, jamás llegarán al punto
que ellos tienen en su primer nacimiento. Digo, en efeto, que este libro, y
todos los que se hallaren que tratan destas cosas de Francia, se echen y
depositen en un pozo seco, hasta que con más acuerdo se vea lo que se ha de
hacer dellos, ecetuando a un Bernardo del Carpio que anda por ahí y a otro
llamado Roncesvalles; que éstos, en llegando a mis manos, han de estar en
las del ama, y dellas en las del fuego, sin remisión alguna.

Todo lo confirmó el barbero, y lo tuvo por bien y por cosa muy acertada,
por entender que era el cura tan buen cristiano y tan amigo de la verdad,
que no diría otra cosa por todas las del mundo. Y, abriendo otro libro, vio
que era Palmerín de Oliva, y junto a él estaba otro que se llamaba Palmerín
de Ingalaterra; lo cual visto por el licenciado, dijo:

— Esa oliva se haga luego rajas y se queme, que aun no queden della las
cenizas; y esa palma de Ingalaterra se guarde y se conserve como a cosa
única, y se haga para ello otra caja como la que halló Alejandro en los
despojos de Dario, que la diputó para guardar en ella las obras del poeta
Homero. Este libro, señor compadre, tiene autoridad por dos cosas: la una,
porque él por sí es muy bueno, y la otra, porque es fama que le compuso un
discreto rey de Portugal. Todas las aventuras del castillo de Miraguarda
son bonísimas y de grande artificio; las razones, cortesanas y claras, que
guardan y miran el decoro del que habla con mucha propriedad y
entendimiento. Digo, pues, salvo vuestro buen parecer, señor maese Nicolás,
que éste y Amadís de Gaula queden libres del fuego, y todos los demás, sin
hacer más cala y cata, perezcan.

— No, señor compadre —replicó el barbero—; que éste que aquí tengo es el
afamado Don Belianís.

— Pues ése —replicó el cura—, con la segunda, tercera y cuarta parte, tienen
necesidad de un poco de ruibarbo para purgar la demasiada cólera suya, y es
menester quitarles todo aquello del castillo de la Fama y otras
impertinencias de más importancia, para lo cual se les da término
ultramarino, y como se enmendaren, así se usará con ellos de misericordia o
de justicia; y en tanto, tenedlos vos, compadre, en vuestra casa, mas no
los dejéis leer a ninguno.

— Que me place —respondió el barbero.

Y, sin querer cansarse más en leer libros de caballerías, mandó al ama que
tomase todos los grandes y diese con ellos en el corral. No se dijo a tonta
ni a sorda, sino a quien tenía más gana de quemallos que de echar una tela,
por grande y delgada que fuera; y, asiendo casi ocho de una vez, los arrojó
por la ventana. Por tomar muchos juntos, se le cayó uno a los pies del
barbero, que le tomó gana de ver de quién era, y vio que decía: Historia
del famoso caballero Tirante el Blanco.

— ¡Válame Dios! —dijo el cura, dando una gran voz—. ¡Que aquí esté Tirante
el Blanco! Dádmele acá, compadre; que hago cuenta que he hallado en él un
tesoro de contento y una mina de pasatiempos. Aquí está don Quirieleisón de
Montalbán, valeroso caballero, y su hermano Tomás de Montalbán, y el
caballero Fonseca, con la batalla que el valiente de Tirante hizo con el
alano, y las agudezas de la doncella Placerdemivida, con los amores y
embustes de la viuda Reposada, y la señora Emperatriz, enamorada de
Hipólito, su escudero. Dígoos verdad, señor compadre, que, por su estilo,
es éste el mejor libro del mundo: aquí comen los caballeros, y duermen, y
mueren en sus camas, y hacen testamento antes de su muerte, con estas cosas
de que todos los demás libros deste género carecen. Con todo eso, os digo
que merecía el que le compuso, pues no hizo tantas necedades de industria,
que le echaran a galeras por todos los días de su vida. Llevadle a casa y
leedle, y veréis que es verdad cuanto dél os he dicho.

— Así será —respondió el barbero—; pero, ¿qué haremos destos pequeños libros
que quedan?

— Éstos —dijo el cura— no deben de ser de caballerías, sino de poesía.

Y abriendo uno, vio que era La Diana, de Jorge de Montemayor, y dijo,
creyendo que todos los demás eran del mesmo género:

— Éstos no merecen ser quemados, como los demás, porque no hacen ni harán el
daño que los de caballerías han hecho; que son libros de entendimiento, sin
perjuicio de tercero.

— ¡Ay señor! —dijo la sobrina—, bien los puede vuestra merced mandar quemar,
como a los demás, porque no sería mucho que, habiendo sanado mi señor tío
de la enfermedad caballeresca, leyendo éstos, se le antojase de hacerse
pastor y andarse por los bosques y prados cantando y tañendo; y, lo que
sería peor, hacerse poeta; que, según dicen, es enfermedad incurable y
pegadiza.

— Verdad dice esta doncella —dijo el cura—, y será bien quitarle a nuestro
amigo este tropiezo y ocasión delante. Y, pues comenzamos por La Diana de
Montemayor, soy de parecer que no se queme, sino que se le quite todo
aquello que trata de la sabia Felicia y de la agua encantada, y casi todos
los versos mayores, y quédesele en hora buena la prosa, y la honra de ser
primero en semejantes libros.

— Éste que se sigue —dijo el barbero— es La Diana llamada segunda del
Salmantino; y éste, otro que tiene el mesmo nombre, cuyo autor es Gil Polo.

— Pues la del Salmantino —respondió el cura—, acompañe y acreciente el
número de los condenados al corral, y la de Gil Polo se guarde como si
fuera del mesmo Apolo; y pase adelante, señor compadre, y démonos prisa,
que se va haciendo tarde.

— Este libro es —dijo el barbero, abriendo otro— Los diez libros de Fortuna
de Amor, compuestos por Antonio de Lofraso, poeta sardo.

— Por las órdenes que recebí —dijo el cura—, que, desde que Apolo fue Apolo,
y las musas musas, y los poetas poetas, tan gracioso ni tan disparatado
libro como ése no se ha compuesto, y que, por su camino, es el mejor y el
más único de cuantos deste género han salido a la luz del mundo; y el que
no le ha leído puede hacer cuenta que no ha leído jamás cosa de gusto.
Dádmele acá, compadre, que precio más haberle hallado que si me dieran una
sotana de raja de Florencia.

Púsole aparte con grandísimo gusto, y el barbero prosiguió diciendo:

— Estos que se siguen son El Pastor de Iberia, Ninfas de Henares y
Desengaños de celos.

— Pues no hay más que hacer —dijo el cura—, sino entregarlos al brazo seglar
del ama; y no se me pregunte el porqué, que sería nunca acabar.

— Este que viene es El Pastor de Fílida.

— No es ése pastor —dijo el cura—, sino muy discreto cortesano; guárdese
como joya preciosa.

— Este grande que aquí viene se intitula —dijo el barbero— Tesoro de varias
poesías.

— Como ellas no fueran tantas —dijo el cura—, fueran más estimadas; menester
es que este libro se escarde y limpie de algunas bajezas que entre sus
grandezas tiene. Guárdese, porque su autor es amigo mío, y por respeto de
otras más heroicas y levantadas obras que ha escrito.

— Éste es —siguió el barbero— El Cancionero de López Maldonado.

— También el autor de ese libro —replicó el cura— es grande amigo mío, y sus
versos en su boca admiran a quien los oye; y tal es la suavidad de la voz
con que los canta, que encanta. Algo largo es en las églogas, pero nunca lo
bueno fue mucho: guárdese con los escogidos. Pero, ¿qué libro es ese que
está junto a él?

— La Galatea, de Miguel de Cervantes —dijo el barbero.

— Muchos años ha que es grande amigo mío ese Cervantes, y sé que es más
versado en desdichas que en versos. Su libro tiene algo de buena invención;
propone algo, y no concluye nada: es menester esperar la segunda parte que
promete; quizá con la emienda alcanzará del todo la misericordia que ahora
se le niega; y, entre tanto que esto se ve, tenedle recluso en vuestra
posada, señor compadre.

— Que me place —respondió el barbero—. Y aquí vienen tres, todos juntos: La
Araucana, de don Alonso de Ercilla; La Austríada, de Juan Rufo, jurado de
Córdoba, y El Monserrato, de Cristóbal de Virués, poeta valenciano.

— Todos esos tres libros —dijo el cura— son los mejores que, en verso
heroico, en lengua castellana están escritos, y pueden competir con los más
famosos de Italia: guárdense como las más ricas prendas de poesía que tiene
España.

Cansóse el cura de ver más libros; y así, a carga cerrada, quiso que todos
los demás se quemasen; pero ya tenía abierto uno el barbero, que se llamaba
Las lágrimas de Angélica.

— Lloráralas yo —dijo el cura en oyendo el nombre— si tal libro hubiera
mandado quemar; porque su autor fue uno de los famosos poetas del mundo, no
sólo de España, y fue felicísimo en la tradución de algunas fábulas de
Ovidio.




Capítulo VII. De la segunda salida de nuestro buen caballero don Quijote de
la Mancha

Estando en esto, comenzó a dar voces don Quijote, diciendo:

— Aquí, aquí, valerosos caballeros; aquí es menester mostrar la fuerza de
vuestros valerosos brazos, que los cortesanos llevan lo mejor del torneo.

Por acudir a este ruido y estruendo, no se pasó adelante con el escrutinio
de los demás libros que quedaban; y así, se cree que fueron al fuego, sin
ser vistos ni oídos, La Carolea y León de España, con Los Hechos del
Emperador, compuestos por don Luis de Ávila, que, sin duda, debían de estar
entre los que quedaban; y quizá, si el cura los viera, no pasaran por tan
rigurosa sentencia.

Cuando llegaron a don Quijote, ya él estaba levantado de la cama, y
proseguía en sus voces y en sus desatinos, dando cuchilladas y reveses a
todas partes, estando tan despierto como si nunca hubiera dormido.
Abrazáronse con él, y por fuerza le volvieron al lecho; y, después que hubo
sosegado un poco, volviéndose a hablar con el cura, le dijo:

— Por cierto, señor arzobispo Turpín, que es gran mengua de los que nos
llamamos doce Pares dejar, tan sin más ni más, llevar la vitoria deste
torneo a los caballeros cortesanos, habiendo nosotros los aventureros
ganado el prez en los tres días antecedentes.

— Calle vuestra merced, señor compadre —dijo el cura—, que Dios será servido
que la suerte se mude, y que lo que hoy se pierde se gane mañana; y atienda
vuestra merced a su salud por agora, que me parece que debe de estar
demasiadamente cansado, si ya no es que está malferido.

— Ferido no —dijo don Quijote—, pero molido y quebrantado, no hay duda en
ello; porque aquel bastardo de don Roldán me ha molido a palos con el
tronco de una encina, y todo de envidia, porque ve que yo solo soy el
opuesto de sus valentías. Mas no me llamaría yo Reinaldos de Montalbán si,
en levantándome deste lecho, no me lo pagare, a pesar de todos sus
encantamentos; y, por agora, tráiganme de yantar, que sé que es lo que más
me hará al caso, y quédese lo del vengarme a mi cargo.

Hiciéronlo ansí: diéronle de comer, y quedóse otra vez dormido, y ellos,
admirados de su locura.

Aquella noche quemó y abrasó el ama cuantos libros había en el corral y en
toda la casa, y tales debieron de arder que merecían guardarse en perpetuos
archivos; mas no lo permitió su suerte y la pereza del escrutiñador; y así,
se cumplió el refrán en ellos de que pagan a las veces justos por
pecadores.

Uno de los remedios que el cura y el barbero dieron, por entonces, para el
mal de su amigo, fue que le murasen y tapiasen el aposento de los libros,
porque cuando se levantase no los hallase —quizá quitando la causa, cesaría
el efeto—, y que dijesen que un encantador se los había llevado, y el
aposento y todo; y así fue hecho con mucha presteza. De allí a dos días se
levantó don Quijote, y lo primero que hizo fue ir a

ver sus libros; y, como no hallaba el aposento donde le había dejado,
andaba de una en otra parte buscándole. Llegaba adonde solía tener la
puerta, y tentábala con las manos, y volvía y revolvía los ojos por todo,
sin decir palabra; pero, al cabo de una buena pieza, preguntó a su ama que
hacia qué parte estaba el aposento de sus libros. El ama, que ya estaba
bien advertida de lo que había de responder, le dijo:

— ¿Qué aposento, o qué nada, busca vuestra merced? Ya no hay aposento ni
libros en esta casa, porque todo se lo llevó el mesmo diablo.

— No era diablo —replicó la sobrina—, sino un encantador que vino sobre una
nube una noche, después del día que vuestra merced de aquí se partió, y,
apeándose de una sierpe en que venía caballero, entró en el aposento, y no
sé lo que se hizo dentro, que a cabo de poca pieza salió volando por el
tejado, y dejó la casa llena de humo; y, cuando acordamos a mirar lo que
dejaba hecho, no vimos libro ni aposento alguno; sólo se nos acuerda muy
bien a mí y al ama que, al tiempo del partirse aquel mal viejo, dijo en
altas voces que, por enemistad secreta que tenía al dueño de aquellos
libros y aposento, dejaba hecho el daño en aquella casa que después se
vería. Dijo también que se llamaba el sabio Muñatón.

— Frestón diría —dijo don Quijote.

— No sé —respondió el ama— si se llamaba Frestón o Fritón; sólo sé que acabó
en tón su nombre.

— Así es —dijo don Quijote—; que ése es un sabio encantador, grande enemigo
mío, que me tiene ojeriza, porque sabe por sus artes y letras que tengo de
venir, andando los tiempos, a pelear en singular batalla con un caballero a
quien él favorece, y le tengo de vencer, sin que él lo pueda estorbar, y
por esto procura hacerme todos los sinsabores que puede; y mándole yo que
mal podrá él contradecir ni evitar lo que por el cielo está ordenado.

— ¿Quién duda de eso? —dijo la sobrina—. Pero, ¿quién le mete a vuestra
merced, señor tío, en esas pendencias? ¿No será mejor estarse pacífico en
su casa y no irse por el mundo a buscar pan de trastrigo, sin considerar
que muchos van por lana y vuelven tresquilados?

— ¡Oh sobrina mía —respondió don Quijote—, y cuán mal que estás en la
cuenta! Primero que a mí me tresquilen, tendré peladas y quitadas las
barbas a cuantos imaginaren tocarme en la punta de un solo cabello.

No quisieron las dos replicarle más, porque vieron que se le encendía la
cólera.

Es, pues, el caso que él estuvo quince días en casa muy sosegado, sin dar
muestras de querer segundar sus primeros devaneos, en los cuales días pasó
graciosísimos cuentos con sus dos compadres el cura y el barbero, sobre que
él decía que la cosa de que más necesidad tenía el mundo era de caballeros
andantes y de que en él se resucitase la caballería andantesca. El cura
algunas veces le contradecía y otras concedía, porque si no guardaba este
artificio, no había poder averiguarse con él.

En este tiempo, solicitó don Quijote a un labrador vecino suyo, hombre de
bien —si es que este título se puede dar al que es pobre—, pero de muy poca
sal en la mollera. En resolución, tanto le dijo, tanto le persuadió y
prometió, que el pobre villano se determinó de salirse con él y servirle de
escudero. Decíale, entre otras cosas, don Quijote que se dispusiese a ir
con él de buena gana, porque tal vez le podía suceder aventura que ganase,
en quítame allá esas pajas, alguna ínsula, y le dejase a él por gobernador
della. Con estas promesas y otras tales, Sancho Panza, que así se llamaba
el labrador, dejó su mujer y hijos y asentó por escudero de su vecino.

Dio luego don Quijote orden en buscar dineros; y, vendiendo una cosa y
empeñando otra, y malbaratándolas todas, llegó una razonable cantidad.
Acomodóse asimesmo de una rodela, que pidió prestada a un su amigo, y,
pertrechando su rota celada lo mejor que pudo, avisó a su escudero Sancho
del día y la hora que pensaba ponerse en camino, para que él se acomodase
de lo que viese que más le era menester. Sobre todo le encargó que llevase
alforjas; e dijo que sí llevaría, y que ansimesmo pensaba llevar un asno
que tenía muy bueno, porque él no estaba duecho a andar mucho a pie. En lo
del asno reparó un poco don Quijote, imaginando si se le acordaba si algún
caballero andante había traído escudero caballero asnalmente, pero nunca le
vino alguno a la memoria; mas, con todo esto, determinó que le llevase, con
presupuesto de acomodarle de más honrada caballería en habiendo ocasión
para ello, quitándole el caballo al primer descortés caballero que topase.
Proveyóse de camisas y de las demás cosas que él pudo, conforme al consejo
que el ventero le había dado; todo lo cual hecho y cumplido, sin despedirse
Panza de sus hijos y mujer, ni don Quijote de su ama y sobrina, una noche
se salieron del lugar sin que persona los viese; en la cual caminaron
tanto, que al amanecer se tuvieron por seguros de que no los hallarían
aunque los buscasen.

Iba Sancho Panza sobre su jumento como un patriarca, con sus alforjas y su
bota, y con mucho deseo de verse ya gobernador de la ínsula que su amo le
había prometido. Acertó don Quijote a tomar la misma derrota y camino que
el que él había tomado en su primer viaje, que fue por el campo de Montiel,
por el cual caminaba con menos pesadumbre que la vez pasada, porque, por
ser la hora de la mañana y herirles a soslayo los rayos del sol, no les
fatigaban. Dijo en esto Sancho Panza a su amo:

— Mire vuestra merced, señor caballero andante, que no se le olvide lo que
de la ínsula me tiene prometido; que yo la sabré gobernar, por grande que
sea.

A lo cual le respondió don Quijote:

— Has de saber, amigo Sancho Panza, que fue costumbre muy usada de los
caballeros andantes antiguos hacer gobernadores a sus escuderos de las
ínsulas o reinos que ganaban, y yo tengo determinado de que por mí no falte
tan agradecida usanza; antes, pienso aventajarme en ella: porque ellos
algunas veces, y quizá las más, esperaban a que sus escuderos fuesen
viejos; y, ya después de hartos de servir y de llevar malos días y peores
noches, les daban algún título de conde, o, por lo mucho, de marqués, de
algún valle o provincia de poco más a menos; pero, si tú vives y yo vivo,
bien podría ser que antes de seis días ganase yo tal reino que tuviese
otros a él adherentes, que viniesen de molde para coronarte por rey de uno
dellos. Y no lo tengas a mucho, que cosas y casos acontecen a los tales
caballeros, por modos tan nunca vistos ni pensados, que con facilidad te
podría dar aún más de lo que te prometo.

— De esa manera —respondió Sancho Panza—, si yo fuese rey por algún milagro
de los que vuestra merced dice, por lo menos, Juana Gutiérrez, mi oíslo,
vendría a ser reina, y mis hijos infantes.

— Pues, ¿quién lo duda? —respondió don Quijote.

— Yo lo dudo —replicó Sancho Panza—; porque tengo para mí que, aunque
lloviese Dios reinos sobre la tierra, ninguno asentaría bien sobre la
cabeza de Mari Gutiérrez. Sepa, señor, que no vale dos maravedís para
reina; condesa le caerá mejor, y aun Dios y ayuda.

— Encomiéndalo tú a Dios, Sancho —respondió don Quijote—, que Él dará lo que
más le convenga, pero no apoques tu ánimo tanto, que te vengas a contentar
con menos que con ser adelantado.

— No lo haré, señor mío —respondió Sancho—; y más teniendo tan principal amo
en vuestra merced, que me sabrá dar todo aquello que me esté bien y yo
pueda llevar.




Capítulo VIII. Del buen suceso que el valeroso don Quijote tuvo en la
espantable y jamás imaginada aventura de los molinos de viento, con otros
sucesos dignos de felice recordación

En esto, descubrieron treinta o cuarenta molinos de viento que hay en aquel
campo; y, así como don Quijote los vio, dijo a su escudero:

— La ventura va guiando nuestras cosas mejor de lo que acertáramos a desear,
porque ves allí, amigo Sancho Panza, donde se descubren treinta, o pocos
más, desaforados gigantes, con quien pienso hacer batalla y quitarles a
todos las vidas, con cuyos despojos comenzaremos a enriquecer; que ésta es
buena guerra, y es gran servicio de Dios quitar tan mala simiente de sobre
la faz de la tierra.

— ¿Qué gigantes? —dijo Sancho Panza.

— Aquellos que allí ves —respondió su amo— de los brazos largos, que los
suelen tener algunos de casi dos leguas.

— Mire vuestra merced —respondió Sancho— que aquellos que allí se parecen no
son gigantes, sino molinos de viento, y lo que en ellos parecen brazos son
las aspas, que, volteadas del viento, hacen andar la piedra del molino.

— Bien parece —respondió don Quijote— que no estás cursado en esto de las
aventuras: ellos son gigantes; y si tienes miedo, quítate de ahí, y ponte
en oración en el espacio que yo voy a entrar con ellos en fiera y desigual
batalla.

Y, diciendo esto, dio de espuelas a su caballo Rocinante, sin atender a las
voces que su escudero Sancho le daba, advirtiéndole que, sin duda alguna,
eran molinos de viento, y no gigantes, aquellos que iba a acometer. Pero él
iba tan puesto en que eran gigantes, que ni oía las voces de su escudero
Sancho ni echaba de ver, aunque estaba ya bien cerca, lo que eran; antes,
iba diciendo en voces altas:

— Non fuyades, cobardes y viles criaturas, que un solo caballero es el que
os acomete.

Levantóse en esto un poco de viento y las grandes aspas comenzaron a
moverse, lo cual visto por don Quijote, dijo:

— Pues, aunque mováis más brazos que los del gigante Briareo, me lo habéis
de pagar.

Y, en diciendo esto, y encomendándose de todo corazón a su señora Dulcinea,
pidiéndole que en tal trance le socorriese, bien cubierto de su rodela, con
la lanza en el ristre, arremetió a todo el galope de Rocinante y embistió
con el primero molino que estaba delante; y, dándole una lanzada en el
aspa, la volvió el viento con tanta furia que hizo la lanza pedazos,
llevándose tras sí al caballo y al caballero, que fue rodando muy maltrecho
por el campo. Acudió Sancho Panza a socorrerle, a todo el correr de su
asno, y cuando llegó halló que no se podía menear: tal fue el golpe que dio
con él Rocinante.

— ¡Válame Dios! —dijo Sancho—. ¿No le dije yo a vuestra merced que mirase
bien lo que hacía, que no eran sino molinos de viento, y no lo podía
ignorar sino quien llevase otros tales en la cabeza?

— Calla, amigo Sancho —respondió don Quijote—, que las cosas de la guerra,
más que otras, están sujetas a continua mudanza; cuanto más, que yo pienso,
y es así verdad, que aquel sabio Frestón que me robó el aposento y los
libros ha vuelto estos gigantes en molinos por quitarme la gloria de su
vencimiento: tal es la enemistad que me tiene; mas, al cabo al cabo, han de
poder poco sus malas artes contra la bondad de mi espada.

— Dios lo haga como puede —respondió Sancho Panza.

Y, ayudándole a levantar, tornó a subir sobre Rocinante, que medio
despaldado estaba. Y, hablando en la pasada aventura, siguieron el camino
del Puerto Lápice, porque allí decía don Quijote que no era posible dejar
de hallarse muchas y diversas aventuras, por ser lugar muy pasajero; sino
que iba muy pesaroso por haberle faltado la lanza; y, diciéndoselo a su
escudero, le dijo:

— Yo me acuerdo haber leído que un caballero español, llamado Diego Pérez de
Vargas, habiéndosele en una batalla roto la espada, desgajó de una encina
un pesado ramo o tronco, y con él hizo tales cosas aquel día, y machacó
tantos moros, que le quedó por sobrenombre Machuca, y así él como sus
decendientes se llamaron, desde aquel día en adelante, Vargas y Machuca.
Hete dicho esto, porque de la primera encina o roble que se me depare
pienso desgajar otro tronco tal y tan bueno como aquél, que me imagino y
pienso hacer con él tales hazañas, que tú te tengas por bien afortunado de
haber merecido venir a vellas y a ser testigo de cosas que apenas podrán
ser creídas.

— A la mano de Dios —dijo Sancho—; yo lo creo todo así como vuestra merced
lo dice; pero enderécese un poco, que parece que va de medio lado, y debe
de ser del molimiento de la caída.

— Así es la verdad —respondió don Quijote—; y si no me quejo del dolor, es
porque no es dado a los caballeros andantes quejarse de herida alguna,
aunque se le salgan las tripas por ella.

— Si eso es así, no tengo yo qué replicar —respondió Sancho—, pero sabe Dios
si yo me holgara que vuestra merced se quejara cuando alguna cosa le
doliera. De mí sé decir que me he de quejar del más pequeño dolor que
tenga, si ya no se entiende también con los escuderos de los caballeros
andantes eso del no quejarse.

No se dejó de reír don Quijote de la simplicidad de su escudero; y así, le
declaró que podía muy bien quejarse, como y cuando quisiese, sin gana o con
ella; que hasta entonces no había leído cosa en contrario en la orden de
caballería. Díjole Sancho que mirase que era hora de comer. Respondióle su
amo que por entonces no le hacía menester; que comiese él cuando se le
antojase. Con esta licencia, se acomodó Sancho lo mejor que pudo sobre su
jumento, y, sacando de las alforjas lo que en ellas había puesto, iba
caminando y comiendo detrás de su amo muy de su espacio, y de cuando en
cuando empinaba la bota, con tanto gusto, que le pudiera envidiar el más
regalado bodegonero de Málaga. Y, en tanto que él iba de aquella manera
menudeando tragos, no se le acordaba de ninguna promesa que su amo le
hubiese hecho, ni tenía por ningún trabajo, sino por mucho descanso, andar
buscando las aventuras, por peligrosas que fuesen.

En resolución, aquella noche la pasaron entre unos árboles, y del uno
dellos desgajó don Quijote un ramo seco que casi le podía servir de lanza,
y puso en él el hierro que quitó de la que se le había quebrado. Toda
aquella noche no durmió don Quijote, pensando en su señora Dulcinea, por
acomodarse a lo que había leído en sus libros, cuando los caballeros
pasaban sin dormir muchas noches en las florestas y despoblados,
entretenidos con las memorias de sus señoras. No la pasó ansí Sancho Panza,
que, como tenía el estómago lleno, y no de agua de chicoria, de un sueño se
la llevó toda; y no fueran parte para despertarle, si su amo no lo llamara,
los rayos del sol, que le daban en el rostro, ni el canto de las aves, que,
muchas y muy regocijadamente, la venida del nuevo día saludaban. Al
levantarse dio un tiento a la bota, y hallóla algo más flaca que la noche
antes; y afligiósele el corazón, por parecerle que no llevaban camino de
remediar tan presto su falta. No quiso desayunarse don Quijote, porque,
como está dicho, dio en sustentarse de sabrosas memorias. Tornaron a su
comenzado camino del Puerto Lápice, y a obra de las tres del día le
descubrieron.

— Aquí —dijo, en viéndole, don Quijote— podemos, hermano Sancho Panza, meter
las manos hasta los codos en esto que llaman aventuras. Mas advierte que,
aunque me veas en los mayores peligros del mundo, no has de poner mano a tu
espada para defenderme, si ya no vieres que los que me ofenden es canalla y
gente baja, que en tal caso bien puedes ayudarme; pero si fueren
caballeros, en ninguna manera te es lícito ni concedido por las leyes de
caballería que me ayudes, hasta que seas armado caballero.

— Por cierto, señor —respondió Sancho—, que vuestra merced sea muy bien
obedicido en esto; y más, que yo de mío me soy pacífico y enemigo de
meterme en ruidos ni pendencias. Bien es verdad que, en lo que tocare a
defender mi persona, no tendré mucha cuenta con esas leyes, pues las
divinas y humanas permiten que cada uno se defienda de quien quisiere
agraviarle.

— No digo yo menos —respondió don Quijote—; pero, en esto de ayudarme contra
caballeros, has de tener a raya tus naturales ímpetus.

— Digo que así lo haré —respondió Sancho—, y que guardaré ese preceto tan
bien como el día del domingo.

Estando en estas razones, asomaron por el camino dos frailes de la orden de
San Benito, caballeros sobre dos dromedarios: que no eran más pequeñas dos
mulas en que venían. Traían sus antojos de camino y sus quitasoles. Detrás
dellos venía un coche, con cuatro o cinco de a caballo que le acompañaban y
dos mozos de mulas a pie. Venía en el coche, como después se supo, una
señora vizcaína, que iba a Sevilla, donde estaba su marido, que pasaba a
las Indias con un muy honroso cargo. No venían los frailes con ella, aunque
iban el mesmo camino; mas, apenas los divisó don Quijote, cuando dijo a su
escudero:

— O yo me engaño, o ésta ha de ser la más famosa aventura que se haya visto;
porque aquellos bultos negros que allí parecen deben de ser, y son sin
duda, algunos encantadores que llevan hurtada alguna princesa en aquel
coche, y es menester deshacer este tuerto a todo mi poderío.

— Peor será esto que los molinos de viento —dijo Sancho—. Mire, señor, que
aquéllos son frailes de San Benito, y el coche debe de ser de alguna gente
pasajera. Mire que digo que mire bien lo que hace, no sea el diablo que le
engañe.

— Ya te he dicho, Sancho —respondió don Quijote—, que sabes poco de achaque
de aventuras; lo que yo digo es verdad, y ahora lo verás.

Y, diciendo esto, se adelantó y se puso en la mitad del camino por donde
los frailes venían, y, en llegando tan cerca que a él le pareció que le
podrían oír lo que dijese, en alta voz dijo:

— Gente endiablada y descomunal, dejad luego al punto las altas princesas
que en ese coche lleváis forzadas; si no, aparejaos a recebir presta
muerte, por justo castigo de vuestras malas obras.

Detuvieron los frailes las riendas, y quedaron admirados, así de la figura
de don Quijote como de sus razones, a las cuales respondieron:

— Señor caballero, nosotros no somos endiablados ni descomunales, sino dos
religiosos de San Benito que vamos nuestro camino, y no sabemos si en este
coche vienen, o no, ningunas forzadas princesas.

— Para conmigo no hay palabras blandas, que ya yo os conozco, fementida
canalla —dijo don Quijote.

Y, sin esperar más respuesta, picó a Rocinante y, la lanza baja, arremetió
contra el primero fraile, con tanta furia y denuedo que, si el fraile no se
dejara caer de la mula, él le hiciera venir al suelo mal de su grado, y aun
malferido, si no cayera muerto. El segundo religioso, que vio del modo que
trataban a su compañero, puso piernas al castillo de su buena mula, y
comenzó a correr por aquella campaña, más ligero que el mesmo viento.

Sancho Panza, que vio en el suelo al fraile, apeándose ligeramente de su
asno, arremetió a él y le comenzó a quitar los hábitos. Llegaron en esto
dos mozos de los frailes y preguntáronle que por qué le desnudaba.
Respondióles Sancho que aquello le tocaba a él ligítimamente, como despojos
de la batalla que su señor don Quijote había ganado. Los mozos, que no
sabían de burlas, ni entendían aquello de despojos ni batallas, viendo que
ya don Quijote estaba desviado de allí, hablando con las que en el coche
venían, arremetieron con Sancho y dieron con él en el suelo; y, sin dejarle
pelo en las barbas, le molieron a coces y le dejaron tendido en el suelo
sin aliento ni sentido. Y, sin detenerse un punto, tornó a subir el fraile,
todo temeroso y acobardado y sin color en el rostro; y, cuando se vio a
caballo, picó tras su compañero, que un buen espacio de allí le estaba
aguardando, y esperando en qué paraba aquel sobresalto; y, sin querer
aguardar el fin de todo aquel comenzado suceso, siguieron su camino,
haciéndose más cruces que si llevaran al diablo a las espaldas.

Don Quijote estaba, como se ha dicho, hablando con la señora del coche,
diciéndole:

— La vuestra fermosura, señora mía, puede facer de su persona lo que más le
viniere en talante, porque ya la soberbia de vuestros robadores yace por el
suelo, derribada por este mi fuerte brazo; y, porque no penéis por saber el
nombre de vuestro libertador, sabed que yo me llamo don Quijote de la
Mancha, caballero andante y aventurero, y cautivo de la sin par y hermosa
doña Dulcinea del Toboso; y, en pago del beneficio que de mí habéis
recebido, no quiero otra cosa sino que volváis al Toboso, y que de mi parte
os presentéis ante esta señora y le digáis lo que por vuestra libertad he
fecho.

Todo esto que don Quijote decía escuchaba un escudero de los que el coche
acompañaban, que era vizcaíno; el cual, viendo que no quería dejar pasar el
coche adelante, sino que decía que luego había de dar la vuelta al Toboso,
se fue para don Quijote y, asiéndole de la lanza, le dijo, en mala lengua
castellana y peor vizcaína, desta manera:

— Anda, caballero que mal andes; por el Dios que crióme, que, si no dejas
coche, así te matas como estás ahí vizcaíno.

Entendióle muy bien don Quijote, y con mucho sosiego le respondió:

— Si fueras caballero, como no lo eres, ya yo hubiera castigado tu sandez y
atrevimiento, cautiva criatura.

A lo cual replicó el vizcaíno:

— ¿Yo no caballero? Juro a Dios tan mientes como cristiano. Si lanza
arrojas y espada sacas, ¡el agua cuán presto verás que al gato llevas!
Vizcaíno por tierra, hidalgo por mar, hidalgo por el diablo; y mientes que
mira si otra dices cosa.

— ¡Ahora lo veredes, dijo Agrajes! —respondió don Quijote.

Y, arrojando la lanza en el suelo, sacó su espada y embrazó su rodela, y
arremetió al vizcaíno con determinación de quitarle la vida. El vizcaíno,
que así le vio venir, aunque quisiera apearse de la mula, que, por ser de
las malas de alquiler, no había que fiar en ella, no pudo hacer otra cosa
sino sacar su espada; pero avínole bien que se halló junto al coche, de
donde pudo tomar una almohada que le sirvió de escudo, y luego se fueron el
uno para el otro, como si fueran dos mortales enemigos. La demás gente
quisiera ponerlos en paz, mas no pudo, porque decía el vizcaíno en sus mal
trabadas razones que si no le dejaban acabar su batalla, que él mismo había
de matar a su ama y a toda la gente que se lo estorbase. La señora del
coche, admirada y temerosa de lo que veía, hizo al cochero que se desviase
de allí algún poco, y desde lejos se puso a mirar la rigurosa contienda, en
el discurso de la cual dio el vizcaíno una gran cuchillada a don Quijote
encima de un hombro, por encima de la rodela, que, a dársela sin defensa,
le abriera hasta la cintura. Don Quijote, que sintió la pesadumbre de aquel
desaforado golpe, dio una gran voz, diciendo:

— ¡Oh señora de mi alma, Dulcinea, flor de la fermosura, socorred a este
vuestro caballero, que, por satisfacer a la vuestra mucha bondad, en este
riguroso trance se halla!

El decir esto, y el apretar la espada, y el cubrirse bien de su rodela, y
el arremeter al vizcaíno, todo fue en un tiempo, llevando determinación de
aventurarlo todo a la de un golpe solo.

El vizcaíno, que así le vio venir contra él, bien entendió por su denuedo
su coraje, y determinó de hacer lo mesmo que don Quijote; y así, le aguardó
bien cubierto de su almohada, sin poder rodear la mula a una ni a otra
parte; que ya, de puro cansada y no hecha a semejantes niñerías, no podía
dar un paso.

Venía, pues, como se ha dicho, don Quijote contra el cauto vizcaíno, con la
espada en alto, con determinación de abrirle por medio, y el vizcaíno le
aguardaba ansimesmo levantada la espada y aforrado con su almohada, y todos
los circunstantes estaban temerosos y colgados de lo que había de suceder
de aquellos tamaños golpes con que se amenazaban; y la señora del coche y
las demás criadas suyas estaban haciendo mil votos y ofrecimientos a todas
las imágenes y casas de devoción de España, porque Dios librase a su
escudero y a ellas de aquel tan grande peligro en que se hallaban.

Pero está el daño de todo esto que en este punto y término deja pendiente
el autor desta historia esta batalla, disculpándose que no halló más
escrito destas hazañas de don Quijote de las que deja referidas. Bien es
verdad que el segundo autor desta obra no quiso creer que tan curiosa
historia estuviese entregada a las leyes del olvido, ni que hubiesen sido
tan poco curiosos los ingenios de la Mancha que no tuviesen en sus archivos
o en sus escritorios algunos papeles que deste famoso caballero tratasen; y
así, con esta imaginación, no se desesperó de hallar el fin desta apacible
historia, el cual, siéndole el cielo favorable, le halló del modo que se
contará en la segunda parte.

Segunda parte del ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha




Capítulo IX. Donde se concluye y da fin a la estupenda batalla que el
gallardo vizcaíno y el valiente manchego tuvieron

Dejamos en la primera parte desta historia al valeroso vizcaíno y al famoso
don Quijote con las espadas altas y desnudas, en guisa de descargar dos
furibundos fendientes, tales que, si en lleno se acertaban, por lo menos
se dividirían y fenderían de arriba abajo y abrirían como una granada; y
que en aquel punto tan dudoso paró y quedó destroncada tan sabrosa
historia, sin que nos diese noticia su autor dónde se podría hallar lo que
della faltaba.

Causóme esto mucha pesadumbre, porque el gusto de haber leído tan poco se
volvía en disgusto, de pensar el mal camino que se ofrecía para hallar lo
mucho que, a mi parecer, faltaba de tan sabroso cuento. Parecióme cosa
imposible y fuera de toda buena costumbre que a tan buen caballero le
hubiese faltado algún sabio que tomara a cargo el escrebir sus nunca vistas
hazañas, cosa que no faltó a ninguno de los caballeros andantes,

de los que dicen las gentes
que van a sus aventuras,

porque cada uno dellos tenía uno o dos sabios, como de molde, que no
solamente escribían sus hechos, sino que pintaban sus más mínimos
pensamientos y niñerías, por más escondidas que fuesen; y no había de ser
tan desdichado tan buen caballero, que le faltase a él lo que sobró a
Platir y a otros semejantes. Y así, no podía inclinarme a creer que tan
gallarda historia hubiese quedado manca y estropeada; y echaba la culpa a
la malignidad del tiempo, devorador y consumidor de todas las cosas, el
cual, o la tenía oculta o consumida.

Por otra parte, me parecía que, pues entre sus libros se habían hallado tan
modernos como Desengaño de celos y Ninfas y Pastores de Henares, que
también su historia debía de ser moderna; y que, ya que no estuviese
escrita, estaría en la memoria de la gente de su aldea y de las a ella
circunvecinas. Esta imaginación me traía confuso y deseoso de saber, real y
verdaderamente, toda la vida y milagros de nuestro famoso español don
Quijote de la Mancha, luz y espejo de la caballería manchega, y el primero
que en nuestra edad y en estos tan calamitosos tiempos se puso al trabajo y
ejercicio de las andantes armas, y al desfacer agravios, socorrer viudas,
amparar doncellas, de aquellas que andaban con sus azotes y palafrenes, y
con toda su virginidad a cuestas, de monte en monte y de valle en valle;
que, si no era que algún follón, o algún villano de hacha y capellina, o
algún descomunal gigante las forzaba, doncella hubo en los pasados tiempos
que, al cabo de ochenta años, que en todos ellos no durmió un día debajo de
tejado, y se fue tan entera a la sepultura como la madre que la había
parido. Digo, pues, que, por estos y otros muchos respetos, es digno
nuestro gallardo Quijote de continuas y memorables alabanzas; y aun a mí no
se me deben negar, por el trabajo y diligencia que puse en buscar el fin
desta agradable historia; aunque bien sé que si el cielo, el caso y la
fortuna no me ayudan, el mundo quedará falto y sin el pasatiempo y gusto
que bien casi dos horas podrá tener el que con atención la leyere. Pasó,
pues, el hallarla en esta manera:

Estando yo un día en el Alcaná de Toledo, llegó un muchacho a vender unos
cartapacios y papeles viejos a un sedero; y, como yo soy aficionado a leer,
aunque sean los papeles rotos de las calles, llevado desta mi natural
inclinación, tomé un cartapacio de los que el muchacho vendía, y vile con
caracteres que conocí ser arábigos. Y, puesto que, aunque los conocía, no
los sabía leer, anduve mirando si parecía por allí algún morisco aljamiado
que los leyese; y no fue muy dificultoso hallar intérprete semejante, pues,
aunque le buscara de otra mejor y más antigua lengua, le hallara. En fin,
la suerte me deparó uno, que, diciéndole mi deseo y poniéndole el libro en
las manos, le abrió por medio, y, leyendo un poco en él, se comenzó a reír.

Preguntéle yo que de qué se reía, y respondióme que de una cosa que tenía
aquel libro escrita en el margen por anotación. Díjele que me la dijese; y
él, sin dejar la risa, dijo:

— Está, como he dicho, aquí en el margen escrito esto: "Esta Dulcinea del
Toboso, tantas veces en esta historia referida, dicen que tuvo la mejor
mano para salar puercos que otra mujer de toda la Mancha".

Cuando yo oí decir "Dulcinea del Toboso", quedé atónito y suspenso, porque
luego se me representó que aquellos cartapacios contenían la historia de
don Quijote. Con esta imaginación, le di priesa que leyese el principio, y,
haciéndolo ansí, volviendo de improviso el arábigo en castellano, dijo que
decía: Historia de don Quijote de la Mancha, escrita por Cide Hamete
Benengeli, historiador arábigo. Mucha discreción fue menester para
disimular el contento que recebí cuando llegó a mis oídos el título del
libro; y, salteándosele al sedero, compré al muchacho todos los papeles y
cartapacios por medio real; que, si él tuviera discreción y supiera lo que
yo los deseaba, bien se pudiera prometer y llevar más de seis reales de la
compra. Apartéme luego con el morisco por el claustro de la iglesia mayor,
y roguéle me volviese aquellos cartapacios, todos los que trataban de don
Quijote, en lengua castellana, sin quitarles ni añadirles nada,
ofreciéndole la paga que él quisiese. Contentóse con dos arrobas de pasas y
dos fanegas de trigo, y prometió de traducirlos bien y fielmente y con
mucha brevedad. Pero yo, por facilitar más el negocio y por no dejar de la
mano tan buen hallazgo, le truje a mi casa, donde en poco más de mes y
medio la tradujo toda, del mesmo modo que aquí se refiere.

Estaba en el primero cartapacio, pintada muy al natural, la batalla de don
Quijote con el vizcaíno, puestos en la mesma postura que la historia
cuenta, levantadas las espadas, el uno cubierto de su rodela, el otro de la
almohada, y la mula del vizcaíno tan al vivo, que estaba mostrando ser de
alquiler a tiro de ballesta. Tenía a los pies escrito el vizcaíno un título
que decía: Don Sancho de Azpetia, que, sin duda, debía de ser su nombre, y
a los pies de Rocinante estaba otro que decía: Don Quijote. Estaba
Rocinante maravillosamente pintado, tan largo y tendido, tan atenuado y
flaco, con tanto espinazo, tan hético confirmado, que mostraba bien al
descubierto con cuánta advertencia y propriedad se le había puesto el
nombre de Rocinante. Junto a él estaba Sancho Panza, que tenía del cabestro
a su asno, a los pies del cual estaba otro rétulo que decía: Sancho Zancas,
y debía de ser que tenía, a lo que mostraba la pintura, la barriga grande,
el talle corto y las zancas largas; y por esto se le debió de poner nombre
de Panza y de Zancas, que con estos dos sobrenombres le llama algunas veces
la historia. Otras algunas menudencias había que advertir, pero todas son
de poca importancia y que no hacen al caso a la verdadera relación de la
historia; que ninguna es mala como sea verdadera.

Si a ésta se le puede poner alguna objeción cerca de su verdad, no podrá
ser otra sino haber sido su autor arábigo, siendo muy propio de los de
aquella nación ser mentirosos; aunque, por ser tan nuestros enemigos, antes
se puede entender haber quedado falto en ella que demasiado. Y ansí me
parece a mí, pues, cuando pudiera y debiera estender la pluma en las
alabanzas de tan buen caballero, parece que de industria las pasa en
silencio: cosa mal hecha y peor pensada, habiendo y debiendo ser los
historiadores puntuales, verdaderos y no nada apasionados, y que ni el
interés ni el miedo, el rancor ni la afición, no les hagan torcer del
camino de la verdad, cuya madre es la historia, émula del tiempo, depósito
de las acciones, testigo de lo pasado, ejemplo y aviso de lo presente,
advertencia de lo por venir. En ésta sé que se hallará todo lo que se
acertare a desear en la más apacible; y si algo bueno en ella faltare, para
mí tengo que fue por culpa del galgo de su autor, antes que por falta del
sujeto. En fin, su segunda parte, siguiendo la tradución, comenzaba desta
manera:

Puestas y levantadas en alto las cortadoras espadas de los dos valerosos y
enojados combatientes, no parecía sino que estaban amenazando al cielo, a
la tierra y al abismo: tal era el denuedo y continente que tenían. Y el
primero que fue a descargar el golpe fue el colérico vizcaíno, el cual fue
dado con tanta fuerza y tanta furia que, a no volvérsele la espada en el
camino, aquel solo golpe fuera bastante para dar fin a su rigurosa
contienda y a todas las aventuras de nuestro caballero; mas la buena
suerte, que para mayores cosas le tenía guardado, torció la espada de su
contrario, de modo que, aunque le acertó en el hombro izquierdo, no le hizo
otro daño que desarmarle todo aquel lado, llevándole de camino gran parte
de la celada, con la mitad de la oreja; que todo ello con espantosa ruina
vino al suelo, dejándole muy maltrecho.

¡Válame Dios, y quién será aquel que buenamente pueda contar ahora la rabia
que entró en el corazón de nuestro manchego, viéndose parar de aquella
manera! No se diga más, sino que fue de manera que se alzó de nuevo en los
estribos, y, apretando más la espada en las dos manos, con tal furia
descargó sobre el vizcaíno, acertándole de lleno sobre la almohada y sobre
la cabeza, que, sin ser parte tan buena defensa, como si cayera sobre él
una montaña, comenzó a echar sangre por las narices, y por la boca y por
los oídos, y a dar muestras de caer de la mula abajo, de donde cayera, sin
duda, si no se abrazara con el cuello; pero, con todo eso, sacó los pies de
los estribos y luego soltó los brazos; y la mula, espantada del terrible
golpe, dio a correr por el campo, y a pocos corcovos dio con su dueño en
tierra.

Estábaselo con mucho sosiego mirando don Quijote, y, como lo vio caer,
saltó de su caballo y con mucha ligereza se llegó a él, y, poniéndole la
punta de la espada en los ojos, le dijo que se rindiese; si no, que le
cortaría la cabeza. Estaba el vizcaíno tan turbado que no podía responder
palabra, y él lo pasara mal, según estaba ciego don Quijote, si las señoras
del coche, que hasta entonces con gran desmayo habían mirado la pendencia,
no fueran adonde estaba y le pidieran con mucho encarecimiento les hiciese
tan gran merced y favor de perdonar la vida a aquel su escudero. A lo cual
don Quijote respondió, con mucho entono y gravedad:

— Por cierto, fermosas señoras, yo soy muy contento de hacer lo que me
pedís; mas ha de ser con una condición y concierto, y es que este caballero
me ha de prometer de ir al lugar del Toboso y presentarse de mi parte ante
la sin par doña Dulcinea, para que ella haga dél lo que más fuere de su
voluntad.

La temerosa y desconsolada señora, sin entrar en cuenta de lo que don
Quijote pedía, y sin preguntar quién Dulcinea fuese, le prometió que el
escudero haría todo aquello que de su parte le fuese mandado.

— Pues en fe de esa palabra, yo no le haré más daño, puesto que me lo tenía
bien merecido.




Capítulo X. De lo que más le avino a don Quijote con el vizcaíno, y del
peligro en que se vio con una turba de yangüeses

Ya en este tiempo se había levantado Sancho Panza, algo maltratado de los
mozos de los frailes, y había estado atento a la batalla de su señor don
Quijote, y rogaba a Dios en su corazón fuese servido de darle vitoria y que
en ella ganase alguna ínsula de donde le hiciese gobernador, como se lo
había prometido. Viendo, pues, ya acabada la pendencia, y que su amo volvía
a subir sobre Rocinante, llegó a tenerle el estribo; y antes que subiese se
hincó de rodillas delante dél, y, asiéndole de la mano, se la besó y le
dijo:

— Sea vuestra merced servido, señor don Quijote mío, de darme el gobierno de
la ínsula que en esta rigurosa pendencia se ha ganado; que, por grande que
sea, yo me siento con fuerzas de saberla gobernar tal y tan bien como otro
que haya gobernado ínsulas en el mundo.

A lo cual respondió don Quijote:
